---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Fake News, Memes, and the Unconscious Production of Paranoid Utterances

### Lou Caffagni[^1]

*'*The 'collective imbecile' is not, indeed, the mere sum of a certain
number of individual imbeciles. It is, on the contrary, a collectivity
of people of normal or even superior intelligence that come together,
driven by a common desire to stupefy themselves and each other. Whether
the desire is conscious, or unconscious is not important.*'*

-- Olavo de Carvalho[^2]

*'Olavo is right'*

-- Bolsonarist catchphrase

Jair Bolsonaro was elected in 2018 and since then, he has been spreading
conspiracy theories against the electoral system in Brazil thus
discrediting the very process that brought him to the presidency. He has
claimed on numerous occasions that 'only God could remove him from the
presidential chair'. Michele Prado[^3] has described the messianic
imaginary that surrounded Bolsonaro's government, where some circles
considered him as a leader 'chosen by God to win an electoral war'[^4].
Thus, when Lula da Silva's victory was announced on October 30, 2022,
Bolsonaro's followers quickly blocked highways and put into practice
the coup d'état that they had already been planning for four years
since Bolsonaro took power. With the support of the Federal Highway
Police and Military Police, truck drivers occupied roads and highways,
halting the circulation of people and goods and choking the main cities
of the country. The blockades were only lifted weeks later thanks to the
action of football supporters who when the Brazilian national football
championship resumed were eager to attend the matches and support their
teams. To access the stadiums, they had to clear the way from the
Bolsonarist barricades. Even the most fanatical supporters of Bolsonaro
could not stand in the way of the Gaviões da Fiel, or, the Faithful
Hawks, the organized fan union of Corinthians.[^5]) Someone could say,
perhaps, that God sent the 'faithful Corinthians' to spread His wisdom
and will: 'Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth. It
always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres.'[^6]

However, hatred also persists, and the insurrectionists, having been
pushed off the road blockades, then moved to the entrances of military
headquarters in nearly every Brazilian city, setting up camps and
protests calling for military intervention. For two months, they held
their ground, many of them losing their jobs and families to be able to
live in the camps permanently, while others came back and forth from the
camps every day, often bringing their children. Their participation was
fueled by social media messages with photomontages about military
operations, movements of tanks, soldiers, and equipment that supposedly
had never been seen in Brazil's history. In the meantime, Bolsonaro hid
in the Presidential Palace, refusing to acknowledge his defeat. A few
days before the end of his term, he flew to Florida with his family.

On January 8, 2023, one week after Lula da Silva's inauguration,
Brasilia was taken over by barbarian invaders wearing yellow and green
shirts, calling for a military coup to reinstate Bolsonaro as the
'rightful' and 'God-sent' president. In this essay, I will try to
understand how so many seemingly reasonable people joined this radical
pro-Bolsonaro social movement influenced by grotesque memes, fake news,
and conspiracy theories.

The kernel of alt-right conspiracy theories became known in alt-right
circles as 'cultural Marxism'. But what the hell is that? Conservative
scholars like Paul Gottfried (founder of paleo conservatism), Michael
Minnicino (infamous creator of cultural Marxism), and James Davison
Hunter (who theorizes the cultural war),[^7] alt-right influencers like
Bolsonaro's political advisor Olavo de Carvalho[^8], and specialists in
international relations, such as Brazilian diplomat and former Foreign
Minister Ernesto Araujo[^9], all believe that communism conquered the
Western world after the Berlin Wall fell. They argue that the fall of
the Berlin Wall gave communism the edge in the cultural battlefield of
the Cold War, allowing communist agents to perpetrate their secret
purposes in an open field. However, they remain convinced that
communism's true aim was not the proletarian revolution. Instead, the
aim is to attack traditional Western values, break down families, and
increase government control over the economy and personal freedoms.
According to them, today, communists are CEOs of multinational
companies, such as Bill Gates and George Soros, media corporations such
as *NBC*, *CBS* (USA), *Globo* (Brazil), and *BBC* (UK), as well as most
journalists, popular artists, judges, and politicians. As in the
'Purloined letter' in Poe's famous short story, 'they hide in plain
sight'.[^10] Inspired by this type of far-right propaganda, in 2018,
Brazilian conservative groups spread false rumors on social media about
a so-called gay kit being distributed in schools to promote
homosexuality. This gay kit was a fake news piece accusing left-wing
politicians of distributing insidious educational material to promote a
gay lifestyle as part of what the alt-right called 'gender ideology'.
What was the star attraction of this fictional pedagogical kit'? A
phallic-shaped baby bottle they named the 'cock bottle'.

![Figure 1: Still image from a social media video showing a prototype of
the phallic feeding bottle. Source: Facebook. Iconografia da História](imgs/5_1.png)

<br/>


These groups claimed, without any evidence, that communist agents had
infiltrated the media, the courts, and the elite in Brazil, who in turn
manipulated the election to ensure Lula da Silva's victory. They
claimed that communist agents had secret rooms inside the Brazilian
Superior Electoral Court (TSE), contaminated electronic voting machines
with malware, and also helped to spread disinformation against Bolsonaro
and his supporters to justify their actions. They argue, based on an
obscure interpretation of Article 142 of the Brazilian constitution,
that the army's true mission was to moderate between the legislative,
executive, and judicial powers.[^11] However, their true plan was to
instigate social chaos by paralyzing roads, attacking the seat of
government power, stopping public services, and through enough pressure,
forcing Lula da Silva to call the army so they could overthrow its
commander-in-chief and president and thus declare military rule.

In this turmoil, fake news played a decisive role in the failed coup
attempt, just as it did in the events of the Capitol Riot two years
earlier in the USA. The universe of fake news is driven by a delusionary
discourse that has a significant presence in the academy, politics, and
other institutions.

## Rhetorics, Philosophy, and Memetization

The relationship between image, mimesis, and political discourse are as
old as philosophy itself. Even though memes and fake news are considered
contemporary media and political phenomena bolstered by the rise of
algorithmically driven social media platforms, the reflection on the
political dimension of images in ancient Greece remains relevant. In
Gorgias, Plato[^12] recounts a dialogue between Socrates and Callicles
about rhetoric. Calicles, a sophist, argues that rhetoric is a
specialized art that aims to convince and persuade the audience to
achieve political goals. He believes that rhetoric is essential for
educating political leaders to govern the polis and exert power over
fellow citizens. A good rhetorician, as Calicles argues, must have a
deep understanding of the nature of passions and use them wisely.
Socrates, on the other hand, considers rhetoric to be an inferior art
because, while it can persuade, it is incapable of revealing the true
essence of things. Aristotle[^13] had a slightly higher opinion of
rhetoric. For him, rhetoric was not just an art form but also a
necessary tool in political decision-making, and legal processes, even
though rhetorical syllogism is inferior to scientific syllogism.
Cicero[^14] takes it a step further and emphasizes that rhetoric plays a
fundamental role in the political education of citizens. My thesis is
that memetic rhetoric is not like traditional rhetoric, but rather a
simulacrum of rhetoric, or, to put it in another way, rhetoric is to
memetic discourse as journalism is to fake news; it is a void and
seemingly mimesis, a meta-mimetic genre.[^15]

According to Cicero,[^16] true rhetoric does not ignore reality, but
rather integrates the discourse (*verba*), knowledge about its subject,
things (*res*), and the context or the audience of the discourse.
Rhetoric is not merely a manipulation of emotions but a discourse that
connects knowledge and communication techniques. Pericles' speeches are
a perfect example of this conception of rhetoric. Although he seeks to
convince the audience, his discourse mobilizes a series of knowledge.
Pericles was efficient only insofar as he concatenated a set of
knowledge and facts to communicate the truthfulness of the events.[^17]
Classical rhetoric aims to persuade the crowd's infatuations by
referring to certain facts and through a set of knowledge and
techniques. Its uses and strategies depend on a certain knowledge of the
subject, political action, and human emotions, even if it is merely
instrumental.

In *Logic of Sense*, Gilles Deleuze argues that the true opposition in
Platonism is not between immutable ideas and their mundane copies, but
between these copies and simulacra.[^18] Simulacra are copies of copies,
representations of sensible things that are themselves imperfect copies
of immutable ideas. There is a hierarchy of mimetic devices that starts
in the transition between ideas and sensible beings and ends in the
transition between these beings and their copies. Simulacra are like
paintings of nature that resort to technical gimmicks to produce effects
of resemblance. They generate resemblances through optical illusions. If
philosophy seeks to recognize the immutable essence of being by looking
up to the perfect realm of ideas, by contrast, rhetoric is more
concerned with humans, as faulty copies of the ethereal ideal of
Humanity. Philosophy and rhetoric thus represent two opposing forms of
discourse and communication in the political realm. On the one hand, the
search for truth, on the other, the realm of appearances. However, the
true division is not between populist rhetoric and technicism, but
between these two types of communication and the trend of memetizing
political discourse.[^19] Memes are cultural forms that emerged with the
Internet and include imitations of arguments, news, or opinions mainly
in visual form but sometimes incorporating texts. Their true essence
lies in their ability to spread and replicate like a virus. The
mainstream media journalistic form is hijacked by alt-right groups to
subvert the truth in the form of memes and fake news.[^20]

In a different methodological approach, but one equally rooted in the
concept of cultural or semiotic contagion between the two realms,
Richard Dawkins, a North American scholar, introduced the term meme
(derived from the supposed theory of memetics), or 'mind virus'.
According to this theory, the meme is the 'basic unit of imitation',
capable of reproducing a cultural repertoire, much like a gene
reproduces a biological structure. However, the virus operates in both
directions, contributing to the saturation of culture through media
images.[^21]

Like classical rhetoric, memes aim to affect the audience's emotions,
but they do so on a different level. Memes do not depend on a rational
construction of arguments whereas rhetoric acts on the emotions of
self-interested individuals, which can be understood rationally.
Rhetoric mimics the philosophical syllogism,[^22] memetic discourse is a
vulgarization of classical rhetoric, it is a simulacra of truth
discourse. Classical rhetoric and memetic discourse are based on
resemblance, the difference between them is that while rhetoric seeks to
convince and manipulate, memetic discourse and fake news seek to deceive
and falsify. As such, rhetoric plays with rational fears and hopes. How
then do memes such as the cock-pacifier or the fake news that announce,
for instance, Michel Foucault as an advisor to the Brazilian Minister of
Justice mobilize the passion of the Bolsonarist audience? How can these
meme-driven discourses drive thousands of people to an uprising,
jeopardizing their freedom, jobs, savings, and even their lives?

An analysis of Bolsonarist symbolism can shed light on the nature of
their memetic discourse. For instance, we could consider two strategic
symbols: the large yellow and green phallus balloon displayed at several
protests on Avenida Paulista, one of São Paulo's main avenues, and the
epithet *imbrochável* -- a neologism in Portuguese meaning unbreakable
but which in this context designates someone who never loses an erection
and is always ready to perform sexual acts -- assigned by Bolsonaro
himself and his supporters on an Independence Day celebration rally
while the presidential campaign was in full swing in late 2022. The
fixation on the phallus and on the virility of the leader and the meme
with phallus-shaped feeding bottles being introduced into toddlers'
mouths by nursery teachers, is an almost cheap and vulgar literary
expression of the Freudian unconscious. In this way, the memetic
communication of the alt-right mobilizes the collective unconscious of
the crowd. According to Freud, drives and impulses are the substrates in
which the identification process structures itself. These drives are
emotions but do not respond to a reasonable imperative. The unconscious
does not follow a sequential and rational concatenation, nor does it
seek to arrange an argumentation as a successive chaining of thoughts.
Rather, it concatenates signs following a mysterious and dreamlike order
that is not readily assimilated into a logical sequence.

![Figure 2: A still image from a social media video showing a phallic
balloon displayed in Avenida Paulista protests. Source: Reddit,
r/brasil.](imgs/5_2.png)

<br/>


It is for this reason that Freud chooses dreams as the main
manifestation of the unconscious,[^23] while Deleuze and Guattari chose
delusion as its perfect expression.[^24] Far-right memes in
communication thus aim to reach unconscious structures and
identification processes. As such, Bolsonarism mobilizes signifiers that
either threaten or reinforce dominant identities (male, white,
cisgender, middle/upper class, conservative) . Therefore, reality,
rationality, or even argumentation are systematically denied by
alt-right communities.

## The Production and Maintenance of Alt-right Paranoid Utterances

There is a set of conditions that orient the production of this kind of
collective unconscious. Such communities operate within a framework of
specific functional rules, akin to an autopoietic system that reproduces
its essential internal elements and protects its borders from external
intrusion.[^25] The communication process in these communities follows
certain norms that enable their continuity, such as excluding or
rejecting any communication that does not fit their core beliefs or
diverges from them. Rational dialogue or doubt that threatens the
integrity of the discourse is *excommunicated*, while communication is
required to be intensive, continuous, and repetitive. The moderation
device of alt-right digital communities does exactly the opposite of
Socratic discourse. While the latter excommunicates or expels irrational
and untruthful utterances, the former is not capable of dealing with
utterances that contradict its own illusions and misleading arguments,
thereby excluding all reasonable and critical discourse.[^26]

The main operative of these communities relies on information disorders
performed through the usage of fake news, memes, and conspiracy
theories, among others, that reinforce each other and occupy a large
portion of its members' worldview. They create a totalizing worldview
that both replaces and excludes previous assumptions that are not
connected to, or that go against the group's discourse. The members of
these communities often share racial, gender, and class prejudices,
which serve as criteria for selecting new members. In addition, these
communities tend to attack and exclude any member who diverges from
their mental dispositions. If someone posts divergent opinions or tries
to reason with the group, that is, uses critical thinking, they face
public defamation, thereby reinforcing the group's beliefs and
preventing dissent within the group.

In *Anti-Oedipus*, Deleuze and Guattari argue that each society produces
and manages its own image of the unconscious through certain social
practices.[^27] In alt-right communities, these practices are primarily
digital. Scholars have argued that social media operates like an echo
chamber that amplifies, in this case, extreme political positions. The
closed structure and algorithmic logic of social media platforms create
an ideal environment for this kind of herd mentality. However, this
structure is maintained through a set of unspoken rules. Michele Prado
describes how these rules operate in WhatsApp communities and how they
help in constructing echo chambers.[^28] According to Prado's study,
these groups exclude any communication that deviates from their beliefs
and are known for organizing political persecutions against opponents or
ex-members. They also refuse to engage in any dialogue that challenges
their dogmatic positions. Moreover, they react aggressively to anyone
who questions fake news or criticizes Bolsonaro's government. This
ostracism can quickly escalate and spill over into the real world.[^29]
Michele Prado, who was an active participant in these groups, was
expelled, persecuted online, and received numerous death threats when
she began to question Bolsonaro's measures on the COVID-19 pandemic.

When the traditional media presents information that threatens the
integrity of a group's discourse or identity, members of that group
often respond by denying this information. They may disqualify
journalists by conjuring up conspiratorial theories or labeling them as
'cultural Marxists'. For instance, when Bolsonaro supporters were
confronted with scenes of violence during the failed coup in Brasilia on
January 8th, 2023, they sought to repair the group's integrity by
spreading fake news. They accused one of their own leaders of being an
infiltrator for left-wing parties and shared a meme with alleged proof
of infiltrated members in the riots. A meme circulated on social media
during the riots, showing two pictures side by side. One picture was of
a man in a yellow shirt, the color of the Brazilian football team, who
appeared wounded and bleeding. The other picture was of a man hugging
Lula. Some conservative social media communities claimed that it was the
same man in both images, even though a quick look at the pictures would
contradict this claim.

As Freud noted on many occasions, the unconscious often operates by
denying unacceptable realities and projecting internal features onto
external events. The construction of Bolsonarist discourse follows the
same logic.[^30] They deny any reality that threatens their identity and
discourse, projecting their own actions onto others, while accusing them
of perpetuating the same acts for which they are to blame. In addition,
they disseminate fake news and new waves of various conspiracy theories.
To protect their beliefs, they accuse others of doing the same. As such,
these communities operate as an autopoietic hermetic system. They are
fed by memes and fake news produced by their members or by specialized
communication professionals, and these communications shape and generate
collective processes of identification. The system excludes any external
element that represents a threat to it and could break the articulation
of the continuum of communication.

Cognitive saturation is a crucial aspect of the Bolsonarist
communication strategy, which involves circulating memes and other
communications with a high degree of frequency, intensity, correlation,
and repetition. To maintain this saturation, groups need to constantly
feed the system with fresh content. Memes are crafted to elicit strong
emotional responses that excite the fears, passions, and anxieties of
the members, overloading their senses and producing acute agony as an
effect. Fake news and memes usually revolve around specific subjects,
such as the perceived threats to the traditional family, traditional
values, and very often, the fear of a communist revolution, which
resurfaces every week in new guises.

As Deleuze noted, repetition appears disguised through different
manifestations of an event. In this way, memes and fake news make up a
relational network of communication that support and confirm each
other.[^31] Fake news relates to other fake news to compose a
generalizable and totalitarian worldview, always referring to a
mysterious and exotic causality to explain the multitude of effects and
occurrences. João Cézar de Casto Rocha, states that opinions and motifs
are repeated tautologically in the rhetoric of Olavo de Carvalho and his
followers[^32]. Memes must be shared, forwarded, and spread through
social networks, and the threats to conservative values need to be
constantly reaffirmed and reiterated.

In science, an *enunciate* is considered successful if it meets truth
conditions, such as internal consistency and the principle of
noncontradiction. However, conservative social media measures the
success of a statement by how widely it circulates in a virtual space -
the degree of engagement - as well as how strongly it elicits emotional
responses from users. Therefore, the power of circulation lies in its
capacity to emotionally impact the largest number of people. In this
system, each individual functions as a node in a network, consuming,
creating, and forwarding communication according to community
parameters. A successful meme is not determined by how well it adheres
to the parameters of a true utterance, but rather by its ability to
mobilize the unconscious and anxieties of the crowd. Bolsonaro's
supporters thus pervert the principle of noncontradiction in their
discourse. While this principle traditionally refers to internal
coherence, Brazilian conservatives use it to exclude any disturbances
that could potentially threaten the identity and integrity of their
communities.

Instead of evaluating the truthfulness of a statement based on its
correlation with the internal structure of an observed phenomenon, in
this case, it is based on the quality and reliability of the enunciator.
Even if the utterance is absurd, it must be considered true if it is
attributed to an authority or a familiar figure, typically a family man
who is considered trustworthy. However, being trustworthy or having
authority does not necessarily require having any kind of expertise,
having social status, or avoiding self-contradiction. Rather, it is
about being part of the same circle, sharing the same positions, and
despising the same enemies. A reliable person in those circles is
someone who never contradicts the discourse of the community. For
instance, Abraham Weintraub, Bolsonaro's former minister of education,
had his speeches and posts widespread and repeated in the extremist
communities and was therefore considered a reliable and trustworthy
authority figure in the first years of Bolsonaro's term. When he broke
apart with the movement his opinion became suddenly discredited and he
became an enemy of the community. Rocha named this technique of
dehumanization and discrediting of a political adversary a 'nullifier
disqualification'. The technique aims to deny the subjectivity of
enemies and put them in a position of maximum alterity: 'The effect is
terrifying, as it authorizes the complete dehumanization of those who do
not share one's own convictions. And since this is a technique - never
forget it - the nullifying disqualification, as perfected by Olavo de
Carvalho, was taught and multiplied by the myriad of right-wing
YouTubers'.[^33]

João C. Rocha[^34] and Patrícia de Mello[^35] argue that Bolsonarism has
a rhetoric based on hate. It is true that there is a discursive
technique founded on hate, but it is less certain that this technique is
purely rhetorical. Olavo de Carvalho developed his rhetorical-discursive
techniques on his YouTube channel in the form of pseudo-philosophy
lessons for his followers. However, there is no systematic development
of his thinking. If we analyze Olavo de Carvalho's commentaries about
his own style, it becomes clear that he never fully comprehends the
nature or reach of his own techniques. His discursive technique is not a
product of an explicitly elaborated art, as rhetoric is, but rather an
organic and empirical development of certain traces of his personality
in conjunction with YouTube media logic. It is true that this technique
can be taught and indeed was taught. Olavo was a master of authoritarian
discourse and could perfect the features of his dogmatic personality in
a style of linguistic expression, but there is no explicit or systematic
elaboration of this technique. His discourse is the perfect expression
of a form shared by conservative, reactionary white men. The same
strategies are used in chans, social media, online games, or any other
digital spaces where these types of men find the occasion and a forum to
express themselves.

Nonetheless, alt-right communication is not merely an accident of the
unconscious. In addition to what became known as digital militias made
up of anonymous supporters, communication under Bolsonaro's government
involved a coordinated political agency that resembled a military
propaganda strategy. The coordination of digital Brazilian alt-right
communication surpasses in many ways the strategies of left-wing
parties. Although, the delusions are not an effect of these techniques,
but inform them. Olavo de Carvalho, Bolsonaro, his sons, Ernesto Araújo
(Chancellor of the government), Ricardo Salles (Environment Minister),
and General Heleno (Defense Minister) really believed in the conspiracy
theories they promoted, and they acted accordingly on many occasions.
For instance, they purposely abandoned the Yanomami Indigenous people,
letting them die of hunger because they actually believed that
international organizations invented or manipulated the Yanomami ethnic
group, localized on the frontier between Brazil and Venezuela, to take
over control of the Amazon Forest. The armed forces even published a
book called *The Yanomami Farce*[^36] that supports that thesis.
Furthermore, Bolsonaro and Araújo jeopardized their own careers to
support that COVID-19 was a conspiracy to attack individual liberties.
Since the main goal of Bolsonaro's term was reelection, his government
was a series of motorcycle rallies, campaign speeches, and populist
measures, but he bet all his chips on the thesis of the COVID-19
conspiracy. If he had adopted a reasonable policy during the pandemic,
if he had not scorned dead and sick people publicly as he did, if he had
not let seven hundred thousand people die, he would probably have been
reelected. But why did he pose for pictures chasing the Esplanada's emus
with a box of chloroquine in his hands? Why would a well-established
economist, such as Finance Minister Guedes, or a career diplomat, such
as Araújo, jeopardize their reputation and liberty to support the
bullshit of 'cultural Marxism'? Why would thousands of reasonable,
ordinary people invade, occupy, and plunder public buildings to defend a
coup? Because they really believe in these conspiracies, and because
this discourse has been constructed since the end of the military
dictatorship. Documents like the *Orvil Project,*[^37] a classified file
that recounts a delusional version of Brazil's history through a war
between communists and patriots, and whose last chapter is the cultural
war, was written in the 1970s and has been unearthed by the far-right.

Unconscious beliefs do not act alone in this war. Today, there is a
pragmatic, systematic, and international organization of alt-right
forces. Neoconservatives have emerged in many countries in the second
half of the 20th century. Initially, they were fragmented and
disconnected. In the US, they included the anti-communism of McCarthy in
the 1950s, including the *John Birch Society* (founded in 1958), white
supremacists, and later, Incels, Tea Party Organization,
anti-immigration militias, and others. In France, they included the
Front National (1972), the *Nouvelle Droite*, and the *Groupement de
Recherche et d'Études Pour la Civilisation Européenne*, created in
1968. In Germany, there is the *Aktion Neue Rechte* (1972).[^38] In
Brazil, leaders of the military dictatorship such as General Garrastazu
Médici (president of Brazil between 1969 and 1974), General Ernesto
Geisel (who followed Médici), as well as the infamous torturer Carlos
Brilhante Ustra (to whom Bolsonaro dedicated his vote on Dilma
Rousseff's impeachment),[^39] and more recently the ideologist Olavo de
Carvalho and his disciples, and Jair Bolsonaro. Slowly and patiently,
they have been infiltrating many social spaces in traditional parties,
universities, armies, religious congregations, and schools.

While the internet is instrumental in the rise of conservative
communities, many far-right scholars and ideologists have also published
their worldviews in books and essays, often through respected academic
publishers. For instance, Paul Gottfried, the founder of the
paleoconservative[^40] movement, and James Division Hunter, the creator
of the concept of 'cultural Marxism', are professors at US
universities who have published works with some of the most important
academic publishers in the US. A simulacrum device thus drives the
discourse and communication of the alt-right. Conservative scholars
often take scientific, sociological, and philosophical concepts and
twist them into conspiratorial and delusional theories. They
misinterpret the Gramscian concept of hegemony and the sociological
concept of globalization as cultural Marxism and globalism,
respectively, changing the moral signal value of original theories.[^41]
Ideologists like Olavo de Carvalho then take these academic ideas and
turn them into more accessible forms of communication.[^42] In their
turn, social media influencers take these ideas and turn them into memes
and fake news. This process is not straightforward and is not just
one-way. While sometimes internet communicators can influence academics,
in general, the communication process flows from scholars, politicians,
and ideologues to internet communicators and lastly, the crowds. While
the academic production of the alt-right constitutes a theoretical
corpus, there is an unconscious guideline that runs through these
theories that connects them to internet communities. Between the top and
the bottom of this network, a series of translations and vulgarizations
of conspiracy theories can be observed. This process is what I call a
simulacrum process, driven by unconscious imperatives. Like Plato's
*simulacrum*, the process is driven by mimesis, as argued by Horbyk,
Löfgren, Soriano, and Prymachenko, and where 'imitation and mimicry are
at the heart of 'fake news' just as Aristotelian mimesis is at the heart
of fiction; but while a fictional text seeks to imitate life, 'fake
news' texts imitate other texts, those of actual news. It is a
meta-mimesis'.[^43]

The process can be described in four steps. First, conservative
academics or organizations appropriate scientific and sociological
concepts. For example, Gottfried and Hunter interpret Gramsci's concept
of hegemony to create the idea of 'cultural Marxism', understood as a
social and discursive battle of left-wing academics and politicians to
gain dominance over the cultural and political realm. The second step
involves alt-right politicians and ideologues translating this discourse
into a more popular form of communication. In Brazil, the Bolsonaro
family and Olavo de Carvalho are responsible for this transition. They
simplify and amplify the conspiracy theories created in academia,
foundations, and government agencies, and shape the discourse into a
more populist style. The third step involves ideologues and politicians
forming a sect of followers that will disseminate and broadcast their
theories to a large audience through social media and other types of
digital communication. The three first steps are financed directly by
the organizations and parties involved in the two first steps. In the
third step, there is an additional source of incoming links to
monetization of social media channels. The fourth step refers to the
action of the crowd of extremist sympathizers sharing and forwarding
memes and fake news among their communities. The use of WhatsApp in
Brazil is idiosyncratic, for it is a family tool for everyday
communication. Thus, fake news and memes are forwarded in family groups
aggregating a surplus of authority and reliability to the content
shared.[^44] Several organizations, parties, and foundations finance
these actions.

At this stage, memes and fake news are created collectively, and they
come from various sources. Some memes are derived from conservative
discourses in academia, while others emerge from common users at the
bottom of the network. A significant number of them are created by
disciples of ideologues or professionals of digital communication, who
aim to manipulate the crowd. Nevertheless, this group creates pieces of
communication as a strategy to support the 'cultural war' they believe
they are fighting. The strategy of memes informed by conspiracy
theories, oriented by collective paranoid delusions, is just one example
of how it can be deployed.

## Final Remarks

The inner nature of memes involves their replicability, fluidity, and
flexibility. A single conspiracy theory can take many forms through
variations in memes and fake news. Elements related to sexuality and
identity that strengthen collective identity and values are present at
all levels. Conspiracy theories, as content, reiterate themselves
through various communication formats, including fake news and memes.
For example, the cock-pacifier meme is not a joke or an individual
delusion. It is a materialization of the conspiracy theory of 'cultural
Marxism' and globalism packaged as gender ideology, another term
invented by far-right and other conservative forces. According to this
delusional approach, international agents of socialism invest against
family values to attack traditional institutions and destroy Western
civilization. They manipulate the entire world to indulge their perverse
desires. In some radical and extremist circles, these desires are
portrayed as satanic and pedophilic, as is the case of the conspiracy of
QAnon, also present in Brazilian communities. For less extreme groups,
the aim of this left-wing elite is simply to control the world and
inculcate an atheist, socialist, and unnatural morality in the
population. In summary, this delusional conspiracy theory repeats itself
across various levels of communication, starting as an announced tragedy
and then evolving into farce or comedy, paraphrasing Marx[^45] and
Deleuze.[^46]

If you were to meet one of the rioters of the January 8 Planalto Riots
in a professional or social setting, you probably would not be able to
tell that they would have the capacity to participate in a terrorist act
such as the invasion of Brasilia. Bolsonaro's supporters are mostly
middle-class and college graduates who have access to knowledge and
specialized journalistic publications. The issue is not access to
quality information, but rather an underlying rational issue. It is also
not about brainwashing conspiracies, or propaganda as they are neither
fooled nor alienated by a specialized master of communication. They act
in their own interest, they are active in digital networks, and they
consciously promote hate speech. They are as responsible for their
decisions as anyone could be. Nonetheless, the unconscious is a
fundamental dimension of politics. As Lacan says, desire is the essence
of reality, and each person reaches the truth that they are capable of
bearing.[^47] They integrate a closed belief system, an unconscious
collective dispositif. When moved by this system/dispositif, they truly
believe in the fake news and memes that they create.

By following military-specialized channels on YouTube during the first
week of 2023, one could see a trove of seemingly journalistic pieces
about army movements preparing for a coup. Even the Bolsonaro family's
social media channels were filled with a multitude of hidden signals
tailored to their audience, pointing to a big event, a great disruption.
This means that the invasion was prepared and fed through social media
to reach the masses to perpetrate a coup. Digital discourse,
misinformation, memes, social media, and fake news are the substrate of
the riots. They produce an unconscious mass reaction that leads to a
violent uprising. Speeches enact concrete events, and they can express
themselves in acts because the unconscious is made of discursive acts,
and politics are always filled with desires.

## Bibliography

*'Projeto Orvil',* (n.d.),
https://www.averdadesufocada.com/images/orvil/orvil_completo.pdf.

Araújo, Ernesto. 'Trump e o ocidente', *Cadernos de Política Exterior*
III.6 (Winter 2017): 323--358.

Aristotele. *Retórica e Poética*, Torino: Unione Tipografico-Editrice
Torinese, 2004.

Barreto, Carlos Alberto L. M. *A farsa Ianomâmi*, Rio de Janeiro:
Biblioteca do Exército Editora, 1995.

Bible Gateway. '1 Corinthians 13:4-7 (NIV),' n.d.,
https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=1%20Corinthians%2013%3A4-7&version=NIV.

Carvalho, Olavo de. *O imbecil coletivo: Atualidades inculturais
brasileiras,* São Paulo: Faculdade da Cidade Editora, 1997.

Cicerón. *De l'oratoire*, Livre III, 5.19, Paris: Les Belles Lettres,
1971.

Deleuze, Gilles. *Logique du sens*, Paris: Les Éditions du Minuit, 1982.

\_\_\_\_\_. *Difference and Repetition*, New York: University of
Columbia Press, 1995.

\_\_\_\_\_ and Guattari, Félix. *The Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and
Schizophrenia,* Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1983.

Freud, Sigmund. *Negation*, *International Journal of Psycho-Analysis*
6.4(1925):367--371.

\_\_\_\_\_. *Totem and Taboo*, London: Rutledge, 2001.

\_\_\_\_\_. *The interpretations of Dreams*, New York: BasicBooks, 2010.

\_\_\_\_\_. *Psycho-Analytic Notes upon an Autobiographical Account of a
Case of Paranoia (Dementia paranoides)*, London: White Press, 2014.

Galloway, Alexander R., Wark, McKenzie, and Thacker, Eugene.
*Excommunication: Three Inquiries in Media and Mediation*, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2014.

Gottfried, Paul Edward. *Multiculturalism and the Politics of Guilt,
Toward a Secular Theocracy*, Columbia: University of Missouri Press,
2002.

Gramsci, Antonio. *Selection from Political Writings 1921--1926*,
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1990.

Horbyk, Roman, Löfgren, Isabel, Soriano, Cheryll and Prymachenko, Yana.
'Fake News as Meta-Mimesis: Imitative Genres and Storytelling in the
Philippines, Brazil, Russia and Ukraine', *Public Inquiry: The Journal
of Kitsch, Camp and Mass Culture* 8.1 (2021): 30--54.

Hunter, James D. *Cultural Wars: The struggle to define America - Making
Sense of the Battle over Family, Art, Education, Law, and Politics*. New
York: Basic Books, 1992.

Lacan, Jacques, *The Seminar of Jacques Lacan: The Other Side of
Psychoanalysis. Book XVII*, New York/London: W. W. Norton & Company,
2007.

\_\_\_\_\_. Écrits: a selection. London/New York: Routledge, 2001

Luhmann, Niklas, The Theory of Society. Vo. 1. Stanford: University of
California Press, 2012.

Marx, Karl. 'The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte', in Robert
Tucker (ed.), T*he Marx-Engels Reader*, London/New York: W.W. Norton &
Company, 1978.

Mello, Patrícia C. *A máquina do ódio: Notas de uma repórter sobre Fake
news e violência digital*, São Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2020.

Minnicino, Michael J. 'The Frankfurt School and 'political correctness'.
*Fidelio*, 1 (Winter 1992): 4--27.

Plato. *Gorgias*. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979.

Poe, Edgar A. 'The Purloined Letter', In: Edgar A. Poe, *The Murder in
the Rue Morgue and The Purloined Letter*. Genoa: Black Cat Publishing,
1999.

Prado, Michele. *Tempestade Ideológica: Bolsonarismo, a Alt-right e o
Populismo Liberal no Brasil*, São Paulo: Lux Editora, 2021.

Rocha, João C. C. *Guerra Cultural e retórica do Ódio: Crônicas de um
Brasil pós-político,* Goiânia: Caminhos, 2021.

Sodré, Muniz. *Antropológica do espelho : uma teoria da comunicação
linear e em rede,* Petrópolis: Vozes, 2002.

Thucydides. *The Peloponnesian War.* New York: Oxford University Press,
2009.

[^1]: PhD in education from University of São Paulo (USP), researcher at
    LECC-UFRJ and member of the Mário Schenberg Institute. E-mail:
    loucaf@gmail.com.

[^2]: Olavo de Carvalho, *O imbecil coletivo: Atualidades inculturais
    brasileiras,* São Paulo: Faculdade da Cidade Editora, 1997.

[^3]: Michele Prado, *Tempestade Ideológica: Bolsonarismo, a Alt-right e
    o Populismo Liberal no Brasil*, São Paulo: Lux Editora, 2021.

[^4]: Michele Prado is a social scientist, former supporter of
    Bolsonaro, she participated in some Bolsonarist groups until the
    Covid Pandemics. When she began to question the government policies,
    she was persecuted by her fellow companions. In 2021, she wrote a
    book about her experience in Bolsonaro's trenches.

[^5]: A union isn't a common term to translate the organizations of fans
    of a club, but I believe is justified because of the social and
    political nature of this specific organization that has played a
    significant role in other recent historical events.

[^6]: Bible Gateway, '1 Corinthians 13:4-7 (NIV),' n.d.
    https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=1%20Corinthians%2013%3A4-7&version=NIV.

[^7]: See Paul Edward Gottfried, *Multiculturalism and the Politics of
    Guilt, Toward a Secular theocracy.* Columbia: University of Missouri
    Press, 2002.; Michael J. Minnicino, *The Frankfurt School and
    'political correctness'*. *Fidelio* 1 (Winter 1992): 4--27; and
    James D. Hunter, *Cultural Wars: The struggle to define America -
    Making sense of the battle over family, art, education, law, and
    politics.* New York: BasicBooks, 1992.

[^8]: Olavo de Carvalho was an astrologer and ideologue of the alt-right
    in Brazil. He has written numerous books criticizing the left-wing
    views, political correctness and supporting many alt-right leaders
    such as Trump and Putin. He influenced the emergence of Bolsonarism.

[^9]: Ernesto H. F. Araújo, 'Trump e o ocidente*'*, *Cadernos de
    Política Exterior* III.6 (Winter2017): 323--358.

[^10]: Edgar A. Poe, 'The Purloined Letter', In Edgar A. Poe, *The
    Murder in the Rue Morgue and The Purloined Letter*. Genoa: Black cat
    Publishing, 1999.

[^11]: Brasil, *Constituição Federal*, 1988. The article defines the
    constitutional role of the Army.

[^12]: Plato, *Gorgias*. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979.

[^13]: Aristotle, *Retorica e Poetica*. Torino: Unione
    Tipografico-Editrice Torinese, 2004.

[^14]: Cicerón, *De l'oratoire: Livre III, 5, 19*. Paris: Les Belles
    Lettres, 1971.

[^15]: Roman Horbyk, Isabel Löfgren, Yana Prymachenko, Cheryll Soriano.
    'Fake News as Meta-Mimesis: Imitative Genres and Storytelling in the
    Philippines, Brazil, Russia and Ukraine'. *Public Inquiry: The
    Journal of Kitsch, Camp and Mass Culture* 8.1 (Autumn 2021).

[^16]: Cicerón, *De l'oratoire. Livre III, 5, 19*. Paris: Les Belles
    Lettres, 1971.

[^17]: Thucydides, *The Peloponnesian War*. New York: Oxford University
    Press, 2009.

[^18]: Gilles Deleuze, *Logique du sens.* Paris: Les Éditions du Minuit,
    1982.

[^19]: My thesis contradicts Plato's position on rhetoric. Plato
    asserts that rhetoric is a kind of simulacrum of episteme. However,
    in his theory of truth, he insists that opinion is distinct from an
    image and holds a superior position in the hierarchy of knowledge.
    Opinions are situated between images and rational argumentation. I
    argue that rhetoric is associated with opinion and the realm of
    politics, while memes are connected to artificial images; they serve
    as copies of opinionated arguments.

[^20]: Horbyk, Löfgren, Soriano and Prymachenko. 'Fake News as
    Meta-Mimesis'.

[^21]: Muniz Sodré, *Antropológica do espelho: uma teoria da comunicação
    linear e em rede.* Petrópolis: Vozes, 2002, p. 56. (Translated from
    the original)

[^22]: Aristotele, *Retorica e Poetica,* Torino: Unione
    Tipografico-Editrice Torinese. 2004

[^23]: Sigmund Freud, *The interpretations of Dreams*, New York:
    BasicBooks, 2010.

[^24]: Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, *The Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism
    and Schizophrenia*. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1983

[^25]: Niklas Luhmann, *The Theory of Society*. Vo. 1. Stanford:
    University of California Press, 2012.

[^26]: Alexander R. Galloway, McKenzie Wark, and Eugene Thacker,
    *Excommunication: Three inquiries in Media and Mediation*, Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 2014.

[^27]: Deleuze and Guattari, *The Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and
    Schizophrenia*.

[^28]: Prado, *Tempestade Ideológica*.

[^29]: Patrícia C. Mello, *A máquina do ódio: Notas de uma repórter
    sobre Fake news e violência digital*. São Paulo: Companhia das
    Letras. 2020.

[^30]: For example: Sigmund Freud, *Psycho-Analytic Notes upon an
    Autobiographical Account of a Case of Paranoia (Dementia
    paranoides)*. London: White Press, 2014; Sigmund Freud, *Totem and
    Taboo.* London: Rutledge, 2001; Sigmund Freud, 'Negation',
    *International Journal of Psycho-Analysis* 6.4, (July, 1925):
    367-371.

[^31]: Gilles Deleuze, *Difference and Repetition.* New York: University
    of Columbia press, 1995.

[^32]: João C. de C. Rocha, *Guerra Cultural e retórica do Ódio:
    Crônicas de um Brasil pós-político*, Goiânia: Caminhos, 2021.

[^33]: Rocha, *Guerra Cultural e retórica do Ódio,* p. 160 (translated
    from original).

[^34]: Rocha, *Guerra Cultural e retórica do Ódio.*

[^35]: Patrícia C. Mello, *A máquina do ódio.*

[^36]: Carlos Alberto L. M. Barreto, *A farsa Ianomâmi,* Rio de Janeiro:
    Biblioteca do Exército Editora, 1995.

[^37]: *Orvil* is a classified document produced by the Intelligence
    Service of the Brazilian Army in the 80's. There is no date or
    author. The document has been circulating in many extremist
    communities since the 2000's. The word *Orvil* is an inversion of
    *Livro*, which means 'book' in Portuguese. 'Projeto Orvil',
    https://www.averdadesufocada.com/images/orvil/orvil_completo.pdf.

[^38]: Michele Prado, *Tempestade Ideológica*.

[^39]: In 2016, the first woman president in Brazil, Dilma Rousseff,
    underwent an impeachment, accused of fiscal misconduct. Many
    scholars, jurists and activists pointed out irregularities in this
    process. Despite the process having followed the legal procedure
    outlined in the constitution, the analysis of the merits of the
    process was biased. In her place, Michel Temer assumed office,
    implementing a series of highly unpopular neoliberal measures.

[^40]: Paleoconservatism is a academic stream of far-right movement,
    characterised by its opposition against immigration, globalisation,
    feminism and gay marriage. It opposes neoconservatives insofar as it
    rejects liberal policies and the globalization of economics.

[^41]: Antonio Gramsci, *Selection from Political Writings 1921-1926*.
    Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1990.

[^42]: Olavo de Carvalho, *O imbecvil coletivo: Atualidades inculturais
    brasileiras.*

[^43]: Horbyk, Löfgren, Soriano and Prymachenko. 'Fake News as
    Meta-Mimesis'.

[^44]: Horbyk, Löfgren, Soriano and Prymachenko. 'Fake News as
    Meta-Mimesis'.

[^45]: Karl Marx, 'The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte'. In
    Robert Tucker (Ed.)*The Marx-Engels Readers*. London/New York: W.W.
    Norton & Company, 1978: 594-495.

[^46]: Gilles Deleuze, *Difference and repetition*. New York: University
    of Columbia press. 1994: 15

[^47]: Jacques Lacan, *Écrits: a selection*. London/New York: Routledge,
    2001
