---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Introduction

### Lou Caffagni, Isabel Löfgren, Paola Madrid Sartoretto, Gizele Martins 

Unlike many books written about historical events, the idea for this
book arose in June 2022, months before the event we discuss in this
collection actually materialized. At that moment, the violent and
nefarious attack on the United States Capitol in January 2021 was still
unsettled. Also, the similarities and connections between the extreme
right's coordinated efforts in the United States and Brazil led us to
believe that if Jair Bolsonaro lost the 2022 presidential elections, the
transition of power would not be peaceful.

What eventually culminated in a coup attempt by *Bolsonaristas* (as
Bolsonaro's supporters are called) on January 8, 2023, in the Planalto
Esplanade in Brasilia, Brazil's capital city, had in fact been brewing
for nearly a decade. In the years following the so-called 'Journeys of
June' 2013 student protests against an increase in public transportation
fares, public demonstrations regarding political dissatisfaction were
gradually taken over by extreme right-wing groups and their agendas.
Since then, several figures from the extreme right's political
underground have been elevated to the status of political celebrities,
supported by a well-coordinated digital communication structure.[^introEng_1] One
of these figures was Jair Messias Bolsonaro, a rather obscure federal
deputy from the state of Rio de Janeiro and a former military
officer,[^introEng_2] known for his controversial views on human rights,
democracy, and gender and race equality, to name only a few. Bolsonaro
went from being a caricatural political figure who was a frequent guest
on comedy and talk shows on television to becoming a presidential
candidate in 2018.

In the years leading up to the 2018 presidential election, Brazil went
through what is now commonly referred to as a parliamentary coup
orchestrated by the Federal Congress with the collaboration of then-Vice
President Michel Temer, who impeached leftist President Dilma Rousseff
(2012-2016) on fiscal administrative misconduct charges. In parallel
with the investigation into irregularities in Dilma Rousseff's
government finances ('CPI das Pedaladas Fiscais'), the Federal Police
conducted 'Operation Carwash'' ('Operação Lava Jato'), whose
proceedings uncovered a massive corruption scheme in the Brazilian
federal government, particularly in state-owned companies. As a result
of 'Lava Jato', former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva[^introEng_3] was
sentenced to prison in 2018. Coincidentally, when Lula da Silva was
imprisoned, he was leading the opinion polls for the upcoming
presidential election. After Lula's imprisonment, the Worker's Party
(PT) failed to promote Fernando Haddad (a former mayor of São Paulo,
Brazil's largest city, and former Minister of Education under Lula da
Silva's previous governments) as an alternative to Jair Bolsonaro, who
by then had the support of a powerful segment of the Brazilian business
community, evangelical church leaders, and a well-oiled social media
mobilization apparatus.

After his election in 2018, Jair Bolsonaro, supported by a
conservative-majority congress, was responsible for setbacks in various
political fields, including environmental and human rights. Political
commentators have argued that Bolsonaro governed for four years
(2018-2022) as if he were still campaigning, always aiming to reach a
small but significant group of staunch supporters who would be able to
expand support during election periods. However, the Bolsonaro
administration's irresponsible handling of the COVID-19 pandemic between
2020 and 2022 had a negative impact on Bolsonaro's approval ratings.
Even with a decline in approval during the pandemic and many other
questionable actions by the then-president and his associates (including
his four sons, three of which are elected officials), Lula da Silva's
victory in the 2022 general election was not easy. He won in the second
round with just over 51 percent of all valid votes.

In a political landscape of crisis and inequality where a few private
media conglomerates concentrate all media power in the country and where
legislation does not keep pace with the rapid development of digital
media,[^introEng_4] the direct and simple communication style of the extreme
right in Brazil (and around the world) gained enormous strength. In
contrast, social movements in Brazil have a long tradition of grassroots
popular mobilization, also in forming political parties during and after
the re-democratization process in the late 1980s. It has been argued
that in the 2022 general elections, this mobilization capacity was able
to reestablish the weakened connection of the Workers' Party with its
popular base. In addition, an alignment of the leftists with some
democratic elements of the center and center-right is believed to have
ensured Lula da Silva's narrow victory.

However, in an era of post-truth, disinformation, and fake news, it
cannot be expected that the results of such turbulent elections would be
accepted without friction. The fragility of the victory and the threats
to Lula da Silva's new government was evident in the coup attempt on
January 8, 2023, which brought the political imagination, narratives,
and characters of the extreme right to the forefront of the Brazilian
and international public spheres.

\*\*\*

Given this political context, we, Lou Caffagni, Isabel Löfgren, Paola
Madrid Sartoretto, and Gizele Martins gathered for an international
conference on media and governance in Latin America during a hot Swedish
summer in 2022 as the COVID-19 pandemic was subsiding. In conversations
about future collaborations and concerned about the upcoming general
elections in Brazil, one of us mentioned the book *The Capitol Riots:
Digital Media, Disinformation, and Democracy Under Attack* (2022)[^introEng_5]
which discusses the 2021 attack on the US Congress.[^introEng_6] We decided, with
equal parts seriousness and sarcasm, to start a similar book as quickly
as possible, so that it would be ready if and when similar events
occurred in Brazil.

Brazil's insertion into the global wave of threats to the
civilizational pact of democracy that culminated in the attack on a
peaceful transition of power that respects the results of democratic
elections deserves a sober discussion of this troubled period. The book
does not aim to be a journalistic document but rather an analysis of the
attack from its communicative and symbolic aspects. More importantly, we
do this from a decolonial perspective that carefully avoids interpreting
the attempted coup in Brazil as a reflection of events in the United
States.

On 30 October 2022, former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva was
elected for a third term, defeating the incumbent President Jair
Bolsonaro, who was running for re-election. In the week following the
second round of the election, protests rejecting the election results
took place on various roads across Brazil. Demonstrators demanded, among
other things, a military intervention to restore power to Bolsonaro, who
they believed was defeated due to election fraud. As such, one of the
main arguments of the extreme right was contesting the use of electronic
voting machines, which have been used in Brazil since 1996. After a few
days of road blockades and intense protests that nearly stopped the
country, several militant Bolsonarist groups continued to mobilize,
arranging protests and camping in front of military barracks for the
following two months.

Surprisingly, the presidential inauguration on 1 January 2023, took
place without major incidents. Like in the United States in 2021, it did
not have the presence of the then-president in the symbolic ritual of
handing over the presidential sash and the presidency to their
successor. However, one week later, on Sunday 8 January 2023, around
4000 people marched in the streets of Brasilia to reach the Three Powers
Square ('Praça dos Três Poderes') and invade the Planalto Palace, the
seat of the Brazilian government, the Supreme Federal Court, and the
National Congress buildings. During the coup attempt, participants
vandalized the buildings and damaged significant artworks, documents,
and furniture posting the events continuously on social media. When
compared to the June 2013 protests mentioned earlier, more than twice as
many protesters occupied Brasilia. In addition, they were not prevented
by police from entering public buildings. At the time, several
commentators and the press considered the possibility of complicity by
city authorities opposed to the new government.[^introEng_7] Nonetheless, Lula da
Silva, who was not in Brasilia during the riots, acted quickly and a
government intervention detained many participants in the act.

As we finish this book at the end of 2023, several participants in the 8
January events are being investigated and prosecuted. In September, the
first three individuals investigated were sentenced to prison terms
ranging from 14 to 17 years. Investigations to identify the financiers
and organizers of the events continue. Former President Jair Bolsonaro
is the target of seven charges referred to the Federal Court, including
incitement to a coup d´état, still under investigation. He has already
been convicted for electoral crimes which have make him ineligible in
the next presidential race of 2026.

\*\*\*

We live in a time when digital communication is characterized by its
connectivity, speed, and often extremism that brings with it a certain
detachment from material reality. The dynamics of digital communication
platforms in late capitalism contribute to the aggregation of extremism
while actors with significant economic power support and facilitate
mobilizations like those in Washington in 2021 and Brasilia in 2023.[^introEng_8]
Communication as a form of social interaction and construction of
meaning can be understood as a fundamental aspect of extremists' agency
that aim to contradict and threaten important civilizational milestones
such as respect for the results of democratic elections.

Using media and communication as a guiding thread, we can follow two
lines of interpretation of the coup attempt in Brasilia on 8 January
2023. The first is to analyze the communicative processes that enable
the organization, coordination, and mobilization around an extreme
right-wing ideology that excludes and dehumanizes others. Following this
line, we can understand the events of 8 January as the culmination of
processes of meaning production and circulation. The second line is to
analyze images and meanints that circulate, aggregate, and mobilize a
significant number of people to commit criminal acts around
anti-democratic ideas. Here, it is not a matter of separating the
message from its context but analytically separating otherwise
empirically inseparable aspects to understand how the political,
economic, historical, communicational, and aesthetic contexts relate to
the phenomenon we are experiencing.

Our goal in *The Planalto Riots: The Making and Unmaking of a Failed
Coup in Brazil* is not journalistic -- there are better sources for this
type of approach. Also, the guiding thread of this book is not to report
what happened before, during, and after 8 January 2023, but to cast a
critical eye on symbolic and communicational practices surrounding the
event in a broader sense. Moreover, the fact that all contributions are
about the same event gives the reader the impression of looking at a
cubist painting, in which the same element is seen from different angles
and perspectives. Some information may be repeated between articles,
however, each approach is unique. Lastly, some articles in the book are
written in Portuguese and others in English. In this way, the reader of
texts in Portuguese will read a different book than the reader of texts
in English and vice-versa. We have included summaries of all articles in
both languages ​​at the end of the book to satisfy readers' curiosity
about its contents.

We begin by discussing the mobilization and circulation of meanings in
the period leading up to the coup attempt. In the first part, *Media
Practices Before the Storm,* Lou Caffagni identifies and discusses the
traces of paranoia in the production and circulation of memes and fake
news using philosophical concepts of rhetorics and simulacra. Viviane
Borelli and Isabel Löfgren discuss the intersection of humor and
politics using the emblematic case of the 'Truck Patriot' meme, an
anti-Bolsonaro internet phenomenon that challenged the extreme right
dominance on social media on one hand but fueled more hatred from
*Bolsonarists* on the other. Isabel Löfgren created a visual essay based
on the meme. Apoena Canuto Cosenza identifies narrative and political
continuities between fascism and Bolsonarism, comparing the 8 January
2023 insurrection to Mussolini's *March on Rome* in 1922. Closing the
first part, Aline Roes Dalmolin and Maria Eduarda Mathias discuss
Bolsonarist mobilizations on social media platforms that led to the
events of 8 January.

In the second part, *The Attempted Coup*, we move on to discussions of
various experiences of the 8 January events intersected by media
communication. Eduardo Ruedell resorts to Walter Benjamin in an
auto-ethnographic account of his experience as a television spectator of
a coup attempt that had barbaric and bizarre elements. Camila Hartmann,
Ada C. Machado Silveira, and Gabriela Schneider identify and discuss the
contradictions between the festive and optimistic sentiment that
dominated Lula da Silva's inauguration on January 1 and the threat to
the democratic pact that was loud and clear a week later through the
lens of mediatized warfare. Gizele Martins reminds us that the extreme
right's coup plot that came to the fore in 2023 had been present and
active in Brazil for at least ten years when seen from the perspective
of popular struggles and the militarization of conflicts in Rio de
Janeiro's *favelas* that could serve as a blueprint for potential
military interventions, such as the one desired by 8 January protesters.
An artistic contribution by Gustavo Speridião and Leandro Barboza's
collective *Faixa Protesta* shows how their 'painting-manifesto' voiced
out people's demands for justice for the antidemocratic acts the day
after the coup.

The chapters in the third part *Art and Architecture: Brasilia* explore
art, design, and architecture as cultural expressions with political
relevance connected to the architecture and experience of the modernist
city. Alecsandra Matias de Oliveira draws a parallel in the history of
Brazilian art between the repression and censorship of artistic
expressions during the dictatorship of the 1960s and 70s, up to the
attacks on the artworks inside the government buildings during the
attempted coup. Next, Oscar Svanelid gives voice to vandalized objects
and artworks during the Planalto riots to discuss the relationship
between art, design, history, and politics in Brazil. Laercio Redondo's
artistic contributions raises questions about the impact and
consequences of utopian ideologies related to the construction of
Brasilia in the late 1950s. In a letter to Oscar Niemeyer, the architect
who designed Brasilia, Tatiana Letier Pinto locates the city's
architecture in Brazil's political history.

In the fourth and final part *The Image and the Other,* the texts
address a traumatic aspect of Brazilian identity concerning our
(self-)image, our complicated and problematic relationship with
Indigenous peoples, and how this relationship came to the forefront
during and after the attempted coup. Clementino Jesus Junior analyzes
the polarization of narratives about the events of 8 January 8th in an
analogy with the game of chess and how front page images in newspapers
frame different narratives connected to the failed coup. Bartira S.
Fortes highlights the paradox between Indigenous visibility at Lula da
Silva's inauguration on 1 January and the negation and silencing of
diversity in the events of 8 January. In a similar vein, Ana Paula da
Rosa discusses another contemporary paradox: the narcissistic
omnipresence of images of the coup participants on social media during
the event in contrast to the invisibility of the humanitarian tragedy
concerning the lives and existence of the Yanomami people in Brazil, who
only a few days after the 8 January failed coup attempt garnered
national and international media attention.

## Bibliography

Canavarro Martins, Marcela. *Political Mobilization in Brazil from 2013
to 2017: A Technopolitical Analysis Using Surveys and Social Network
Data Mining*, PhD diss., Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto,
Porto/Portugal, 2019,
<https://repositorio-aberto.up.pt/handle/10216/122246>.

da Empoli, Giuliano. *Os Engenheiros Do Caos*, Vestígio Editora, 2019.

Jeppesen, Sandra, Hoechsmann, Michael, Hezel Ulthiin, Iowyth, Vandyke,
David, and McKee, Miranda. *The Capitol Riots: Digital Media,
Disinformation, and Democracy Under Attack*, Routledge, 2022.

Peruzzo, Cecilia M. Krohling. 'Comunicação Comunitária E Educação Para
a Cidadania', *Comunicação e Sociedade* 2 (August 29, 2000): 651--68,
<https://doi.org/10.17231/comsoc.2(2000).1427>.

Ricardo, Carolina. 'A Democracia Não Pode Ser Considerada Garantida No
Brasil.' *openDemocracy*, 10 October, 2023,
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/pt/democracia-nao-pode-ser-considerada-garantida-brasil-policialismo/>.

Wylie, Christopher. *Mindf\*ck : Cambridge Analytica and the Plot to
Break America*, New York: Random House, 2019.

[^introEng_1]: Marcela Canavarro Martins, *Political Mobilization in Brazil from
    2013 to 2017: A Technopolitical Analysis Using Surveys and Social
    Network Data Mining*, PhD diss., Faculty of Engineering, University
    of Porto, Porto/Portugal, 2019,
    <https://repositorio-aberto.up.pt/handle/10216/122246>.

[^introEng_2]: Bolsonaro was ousted from the military in the early 1980s after
    attempting to stage an internal coup against the military command,
    in a failed plan involving bomb attacks on army barracks, as part of
    a faction in the military that was dissatisfied with the process of
    re-democratization of the country at the end of a 21-year military
    dictatorship (1964-1985) and the ensuing loss of privileges for the
    military. He then started a political career as a local politician,
    in collusion with former members of Rio de Janeiro's military police
    force that through the years formed a parallel political power
    called the 'milícias'.

[^introEng_3]: Lula da Silva has previously served two presidential mandates from 2003 to 2011.

[^introEng_4]: Cecilia M. Krohling Peruzzo, 'Comunicação Comunitária E Educação
    Para a Cidadania,' *Comunicação e Sociedade* 2 (August 29, 2000):
    651--68.

[^introEng_5]: Sandra Jeppesen Michael Hoechsmann, Miranda McKee, iowyth hezel
    ulthiin and David Van Dyke, *The Capitol Riots: Digital Media,
    Disinformation, and Democracy Under Attack*, New York: Routledge,
    2022.

[^introEng_6]:

[^introEng_7]: Carolina Ricardo, 'A Democracia Não Pode Ser Considerada
    Garantida No Brasil,' *openDemocracy*, 10 October 2023,
    <https://www.opendemocracy.net/pt/democracia-nao-pode-ser-considerada-garantida-brasil-policialismo/>.

[^introEng_8]: See Giuliano da Empoli, *Os Engenheiros Do Caos*, Vestígio
    Editora, 2019, and Christopher Wylie, *Mindf\*ck: Cambridge
    Analytica and the Plot to Break America*, New York: Random House,
    2019.
