— -
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Around the World with the 'Truck Patriot': Memetization and the Circulation of Laughter in the 2022 Post-Election Period in Brazil

### Viviane Borelli and Isabel Löfgren

> ​​*Laughter is a philosophy. Often, laughter is salvation. And in constitutional politics, at least, laughter is an opinion.* — Eça de Queiroz, As Farpas[^f06_3]

## Prelude to a meme

Brazil experienced a historic moment on October 30, 2022, when Luiz
Inácio Lula da Silva (Lula) was elected President of Brazil. For the
first time in recent Brazilian history, a sitting president was not
re-elected for a second term. Refusing to recognize defeat, Jair
Bolsonaro hid in the presidential official residence, retreated into
silence, and left the public scene for two days. In the meantime,
moments after the election results were announced, Bolsonaro's
disgruntled supporters mobilized for anti-democratic and coup-related
actions across the country resulting in the almost immediate blockage of
highways by truck drivers and occupations in front of army barracks by
fanatic militants. In addition, rumors about a military intervention to
step in within 72 hours to keep Bolsonaro in power and annul election
results spread very quickly.[^f06_4] This type of networked social and
political mobilization aided by a symbolic apparatus financed by
businessmen, politicians, and other social groups,[^f06_5] would culminate
months later in the attempted coup of January 8, 2023, in Brasilia.

Two days after the election, on November 1, Bolsonaro finally broke his
silence. In a much-awaited press conference, he assuaged his supporters'
dissatisfaction with his defeat by alluding to electoral misconduct by
authorities, vaguely encouraging peaceful demonstrations, and deflecting
any potential accusations of violence incitement by attacking the left.
In a speech, he declared that

> (\...) The current popular \[Bolsonarist\] movements are the result of
> indignation and a sense of injustice regarding how the electoral process
> unfolded. Peaceful demonstrations will always be welcome, but our
> methods cannot be those of the left, which has consistently harmed the
> population, such as property invasions, destruction of heritage, and
> restrictions on the right to come and go.[^f06_6]

Despite the gravity of the protests, it was during this interim period
between Lula\'s victory and Bolsonaro\'s return to the public scene that
an opportunity for a critical and humorous resistance arose among
Lula\'s supporters in the festive spirit of the victory. However, before
we delve into what became the most acclaimed meme of 2022, it is
necessary to understand the media context of that moment to grasp the
pivotal role of memes in this turbulent period.

One of the most striking features of Jair Bolsonaro\'s government
(2019-2022) was the construction of a sophisticated social media and
media apparatus for organizing and mobilizing supporters. This, in turn,
was supported by an institutional apparatus known as 'digital militias'
that fostered an industry of fake news and disinformation as a
government strategy that helped consolidate the far-right social
movement in Brazil.[^f06_7] As a result, anti-Bolsonaro movements were
forced into a defensive position until the late 2022 general
elections.[^f06_8]

During the presidential campaign, some high-profile Lula supporters such
as Congressman André Janones and digital influencer Felipe Neto used
their Twitter profiles to take down Bolsonaro's fake news machinery with
memes, short videos, sensationalist news reports, live sendings, and
more, to reverse the political situation.[^f06_9] In addition, Lula's
leftist Workers\' Party (PT) established an innovative media strategy by
creating a legal apparatus against electoral crimes committed by
Bolsonaro, whose campaign was largely based on fake news designed to
delegitimize election results and defame his political opponents. Some
of these legal actions resulted in media restrictions and other legal
measures by the Superior Electoral Court (TSE) to thwart Bolsonaro's
strategies to attack the electoral system's legitimacy.[^f06_10] The leftist
campaign strategy was successful insofar as it instilled a sense of
confidence and unity among Lula's supporters, as well as turning the
legal apparatus in Lula's favor eventually leading to his victory.
However, even with significant efforts by authorities and civil society
to combat the Bolsonarist fake news machinery during the campaign, it
was not possible to control the proliferation of messages among radical
Bolsonarist groups in the aftermath of the election.[^f06_11]

## The Road Blockades and the Emergence of the \'Truck Patriot\' meme

![Figure 1: Truckers' blockade on Presidente Dutra highway outside the
city of São Paulo,Brazil. Credit: Lucas Lacaz Ruiz/Estadão Conteúdo](imgs/06_1.png)

<br/>

Soon after Bolsonaro's defeat was announced in the late evening of
October 30, 2022, Bolsonaro supporters took to the streets claiming that
the elections were rigged. They demanded the investigation of electronic
polling stations and a 'military intervention' to delegitimize the
election.[^f06_12] Bolsonarist truck drivers blocked traffic on highways
while others camped in front of army barracks all over the country
(Figure 1).[^f06_13] It is now known that the truckers were supported by
some members of the Federal Highway Police (PRF),[^f06_14] but at the time,
it did not prevent demonstrators from unlawfully blocking the roads or
removing them from specific locations.[^f06_15] As a result of this
coordinated action by protesters financed in part by businessmen from
the agribusiness and cargo transport sectors, and with the veiled
consent of authorities like the PRF, the transportation system fell into
chaos, and deliveries of goods nearly halted in Brazil.[^f06_16]

The incitement for mobilization for the protests occurred largely
through the widespread false information in messages on Twitter,
Facebook, Instagram, and TikTok, but especially in radical Bolsonarist
groups on WhatsApp and Telegram. These platforms, previously used by
Bolsonaro supporters for various national-scale mobilizations during his
government, featured images, videos, and memes supporting truckers, as
well as calls for various protest actions accompanying the
blockades.[^f06_17]

In these gatherings, a distinctive visuality emerged: people wearing
yellow football jerseys and waving flags, and all sorts of nationalistic
paraphernalia in yellow and green, the colors of the Brazilian national
flag (Figure 1) —  a visual identity that had already been
institutionalized within Bolsonarism since the 2018 presidential
elections. Also known as 'Patriots', these green-and-yellow-clad
protesters became the symbols of devotion and sacrifice to Bolsonaro and
his government, who often referred to the then-president as *The Myth*.

On the internet, a curious memetic phenomenon involving a Bolsonarist
'Patriot' marked the history of the Brazilian internet: the 'Truck
Patriot' meme (in Portuguese, 'O Patriota do Caminhão'). We refer to
this event as a *memetivistic turn* —  or activism through memes —  in
Brazilian internet culture and in the Brazilian political landscape.
This phenomenon helped wrest media dominance from the Bolsonarists in
the unstable period that followed but also widened the abyss between
Lula's and Bolsonaro's supporters in the coming months.

## A Ready-made Meme

The story of how the meme started is as one-of-a-kind as the buzz it
created, making it one of the top and most widely discussed memes in the
media in 2022, that 'made Brazil smile'.[^f06_18] On November 2, 2022, the
third day of trucker protests and roadblocks, 41-year-old businessman
Júnior César Peixoto from Caruaru, in northeastern Brazil, went to a
blockage point on a federal highway to deliver food to protesters. At
one point, he noticed that a dissenting truck driver had broken through
the blockade and then attempted to stop the truck while in motion. This
is when the unusual scene unfolded: the man, dressed in a yellow shirt
and Brazil cap, climbed onto the front part of the truck's cabin,
cruised at high speed, and clung to the windshield without letting go
for 10 kilometers. This unusual ride allowed many passers-by and the
truck driver himself to capture the scene on video.

![Figure 2: News report showing the Bolsonaro supporter from inside the
truck, filmed by the driver. Source: *UOL*, Youtube.[^f06_19]](imgs/06_2.png)

<br/>


![Figure 3: 'Bolsonarist stuck to the windshield of a truck that broke
through coup-related road blockade'. Video still. Source: *DCM TV*,
Youtube 3 November, 2022.[^f06_20]](imgs/06_3.png)

<br/>


This is a unique case where the meme is born ready in the face of the
unexpected and unexplainable because the 'Patriot' from Caruaru achieved
the improbable: he clung to the front of the truck for almost 10 minutes
in dangerous conditions against any traffic rules and was captured by
dozens of mobile cameras in photos and videos on its path. The images,
which initially went viral in a video from November 2, 2022, were
captured from two angles: from inside the cabin by the truck\'s driver
that shows the protester's face (Figure 2), and by passers-by and parked
trucks on the highway with a view of the moving truck and the 'Patriot'
hanging in front of the vehicle (Figure 3). The figure came to be known
as the 'Truck Patriot'.

As soon as the first videos of the 'Truck Patriot' were released to the
public, the original videos (Figure 2) quickly became newsworthy in
mainstream media outlets and on messaging apps and social media
platforms. Since WhatsApp is used by 54% of Brazilians, a significant
portion of the population very likely became aware of the videos through
the messaging app.[^f06_21]

After the initial circulation of this material reporting the incident,
anti-Bolsonaro audiences immediately repurposed these scenes into
images, memes, collages, mashups, montages, parodies, and other viral
digital formats. Online news outlets first reported the incident as the
\'man hanging onto a truck\', and later as 'the Bolsonaro supporter on
the truck'. However, after going viral the memes soon came to be known
as 'the Truck Patriot,\' and in international meme repositories as
simply \'Truck Patriot'.[^f06_22]

A search for the hashtag *#truckpatriot* yielded more than 1,000 results
of memes and videos on Instagram, and approximately 3,000 results
including text posts, images, and videos on Twitter, mostly between
November 2 and 10, 2022, followed by numerous iterations in the months
that followed. On YouTube, the 'Truck Patriot' appears in video formats
such as video clips, montages, reportage, comedy sketches, and more. The
memes circulated both among the general public and in the profiles of
politicians and digital influencers associated with Lula, such as Felipe
Neto. Neto created sophisticated productions in the form of comedy
sketches using the 'Truck Patriot' to debunk Bolsonarist
worldviews.[^f06_23] On the most popular social media profiles on several
platforms, posting the meme became an action of what we call *memetic
cultural resistance* to openly express anti-Bolsonaro sentiments that
had largely consisted of reactive responses to his institutionalized
fake news machinery in previous years. Due to the immense popularity of
the meme, it was voted one of the best memes of 2022 both in Brazil and
internationally,[^f06_24] and the meme also has its own Wikipedia
entry.[^f06_25]

However, the circulation of hundreds of memes in various genres was most
intense on November 3 and 4, 2022. At this point, the country was
experiencing widely different emotions. While Lula's supporters were
still celebrating their victory at the polls, pro-Bolsonaro protesters
were staging massive street protests in front of military barracks and
in major cities all over the country, in anticipation of an imagined
military intervention that never happened. Lula\'s supporters were
adamant in showing that Bolsonarists' anti-democratic actions and calls
for a coup bordered on the improbable and the absurd through symbols,
humor, satire, and parodies of the original 'TruckPatriot' video in
various communication channels, on- and offline. We see the
proliferation of this type of content anchored in interdiscursivity, a
type of social communication where discourses relate to one other in an
infinite chain of symbolic production.[^f06_26]

In the hands of Lula\'s supporters, the memes created from this action
became a critical device of both satire and derisive humor that
stimulated a peal of mocking laughter, which according to Vladimir Propp
is a reaction to a ridiculous object or situation.[^f06_27] The
effectiveness and speed of this humoristic device created a sense of
collective catharsis through the circulation of networked laughter and
*schadenfreude*. Turning the 'Patriot\'s' truck-blocking attempt into
comedy and satire expressed a collective joy and relief in Bolsonaro\'s
defeat that served to demoralize the sitting president and his
supporters, and also far-right movements as a whole.[^f06_28] Moreover, it
meant that Bolsonarists were dethroned from their previously dominant
position on social media, at least temporarily.

## Expanding meme genres

The moral, political, and aesthetic dimensions of laughter, ridicule,
irony, mockery, and clever humor were deployed in various mediums,
sometimes using established meme genres or creating new ones. According
to Limor Shifman's early meme theory, internet memes use cultural
elements through an imitative gesture in which a central content is
used, appropriated, interpreted, and recontextualized in modular formats
of established meme genres, or else in new formats that emerge from
continuous iterations of the same content that become highly
recognizable to audiences.[^f06_29] The 'Truck Patriot' meme evolved from
mashups and remixes (sampling and re-editing techniques using found
materials) that became highly exploitable through continuous emulations,
ultimately becoming a *catchphrase*, a popularly recognized expression
through repeated iterations of its original enunciation. As such, the
Truck Patriot entered the everyday life of Brazilians and injected a new
dimension of laughter, ridicule, irony, and mockery that became deeply
embedded in the Brazilian post-election media frenzy. Moreover, the
speed and scale at which 'Truck Patriot' memes were produced and
circulated in various channels by individuals of diverse social
backgrounds, and in both urban and rural areas, turned the various
manifestations of the meme into a democratic expression with a variety
of regional expressions.

![Figure 4: Example of pastiche using cinematic tropes with the 'Truck
Patriot' or UFO clinging onto E.T.'s bicycle. Source: \@SeJustica,
Twitter post, 7 November 2022.[^f06_30]](imgs/06_4.png)

<br/>



![Figure 5: The 'Truck Patriot' mashup and a scene from *Harry Potter and
the Chamber of Secrets* (2002). Source: Instagram \@gharrypotter\_.](imgs/06_5.png)

<br/>

In the field of audiovisual production, *Netflix Brasil* posted a video
collage that combined the Truck Patriot\'s video footage with iconic
scenes in famous Hollywood productions.[^f06_31] The figure of the Patriot
is inserted into action scenes from movies such as *Spider-Man*, E.T.,
(Figure 4) *Harry Potter (Figure 5)*, *Nightmare on Elm Street,
Priscilla, Queen of the Desert, Mad Max,* and *others*, or he appears in
cartoon vignettes like *The Road Runner*. There are also iterations that
reference classic moments in film history, such as a scene in which the
Truck Patriot is seen clinging to a train in one of the earliest films
by the Lumière Brothers, *Arrival of a Train at La Ciotat* (1895)
playfully renamed by commenters as *Arrival of a Train 'with a Patriot'
at La Ciotat*.[^f06_32]

![Figure 6: The Truck Patriot seen outside Greta Thunberg's train window.
Source: unknown.](imgs/06_6.png)

<br/>


Regarding music and popular culture, at times the meme is reconfigured
in visual and auditory mashups with soundtracks added to the original
video clip (Figure 2) with songs such as Miley Cyrus\' \'Fly on the
Wall\' or Gloria Gaynor\'s \'I Will Survive'.[^f06_33] There are also
iterations using iconic images like The Beatles' iconic *Abbey Road*
album cover (Figure 10). The 'Truck Patriot' meme also merged with an
array of imagery of national and international celebrities, as in the
image where the 'Patriot' can be sighted outside climate activist Greta
Thunberg's train window (Figure 6), where she seems to be blissfully
ignoring what is happening outside. Her character serves as a symbol for
all progressive-minded people whose causes and beliefs had been
systematically denied by Bolsonarist ideology, such as climate change.

![Figure 7: The Truck Patriot is seen in front of the Tower of Pisa.
Source: \@folha.[^f06_34]](imgs/06_7.png)

<br/>

In another series, we observe multiple mashups in an extensive series of
over 200 memes depicting the 'Truck Patriot' traveling by truck around
the world, spotted in cities across Brazil and in iconic landscapes and
global monuments in the whole world, such as the pyramids of Egypt, the
Taj Mahal, the Eiffel Tower and the Tower of Pisa (Figure 7). The 'Truck
Patriot' can also be seen in outer space, either plummeting off the edge
of the Flat Earth —  a denialist theory defended by Bolsonarism (Figure
8) —  or floating in outer space, on the Moon, or clinging to a rocket
on the way to Planet Mars.

![Figure 8: The Truck Patriot falling off the edge of the Flat Earth.
Source: \@Drifez_original, 'E vamos de patriota do caminhão chegando a
borda da terra plana', Twitter post.[^f06_35]](imgs/06_8.png)

<br/>

The meme also surfaced on more commercially oriented images, products,
and ads. Within the realm of play, the iconic figure of the 'Truck
Patriot' was incorporated into video game interfaces like *Adventure
Quest 3*,[^f06_36] or became toys as in the 'Patriot Lego' set. Other sets
of toys and thematic paraphernalia like pens, mugs, and T-shirts
appeared either as spoof ads or as items for sale on several e-commerce
websites. Another unusual appropriation is the insertion of the Truck
Patriot\'s image in advertisements and promotions on small business
profiles on Instagram. Here, the Truck Patriot served as a promotional
figure to sell a product or service, and the meme functions as a form of
co-branding where the image\'s virality is used to draw attention both
to the business and the political humor. Another genre of meme involves
social media users sharing their reactions while scrolling through their
social media feeds and looking at the memes, thereby reinforcing the
viral effect of networked laughter circulating among various audiences
beyond the original visual artifact.

![Figure 9: The \'Truck Patriot\' in a carnival theme. In the background
we see a carnival float representing a truck with a caricature of the
Truck Patriot, and in the foreground are carnival goers dressed up as
'patriots' with yellow football jerseys and a cow mask, symbolizing
cattle, as Bolsonarists are referred to collectively by anti-Bolsonaro
supporters.](imgs/06_9.png)

<br/>


The meme also traveled beyond the internet. In the visual arts, the use
of the 'Truck Patriot' image as a cultural icon in public art like
graffiti and mural paintings spread across the streets of Brazil. One of
the most spectacular uses of Truck Patriot videos was as projections in
musical performances just three days after the meme first emerged.[^f06_37]
The meme saw a peak in postings immediately after the election but
remained active in various communication streams in the following
months,[^f06_38] spanning the government transition on January 1, 2023, the
Planalto Riots on January 8, and into the carnival season in March
2023 - a time when Brazilian carnival goers typically express a wide
range of political opinions through music, dance, and costumes. Thus, it
was not surprising that the figure of the Truck Patriot was appropriated
as a central theme in various carnival costumes (Figure 9). The carnival
catharsis was particularly significant because the country\'s largest
popular festival had faced rampant criticism from the Bolsonaro
government in previous years for being hedonist and sinful, and it was
also the first carnival after the COVID-19 pandemic, during which street
parties had been suspended due to lockdowns and social distancing
measures.

As we have seen, memes are produced through the creative and
performative activity of various social actors who apprehend specific
discursive units by editing, reconfiguring, reframing, reassembling, and
then putting them into circulation.

## Memetization as a Form of Political Participation

The concept of *interdiscursivity* is central to a communicational
approach to the phenomenon of memetization both in how memes are
constituted and how they become part of communication processes in this
period of political transformation.[^f06_39] Memetization is a symbolic
praxis of memes embedded in social networks that materializes as a
visual-discursive phenomenon, whose multiple manifestations may become a
form of popular culture, media activism, or political propaganda. Memes
are understood through a sense-making activity grounded in
interdiscursive operations, in such a way that 'the structure of
discourses is always an interdiscursive phenomenon'.[^f06_40] According to
the Argentine semiotician Eliseo Verón, *interdiscursivity* is one of
the constituent conditions of the functioning of social discourses. In
this context, we understand that memes generate humor that serves to
generate laughter as an effect of meaning because, as Verón reminds us,
a discourse always generates a field of effects and never a single
effect due to its non-linearity and the constitutive dissonances between
production and recognition.[^f06_41]

According to Shifman, when internet users create or consume political
memes, they engage in a 'normative debate about how the world should (or
should not) be and the best way to achieve that vision'. The circulation
of memes and their various discursive constructs also express struggle
and resistance as poetic and humorous devices used in political contexts
where the meme activates 'public discourses \[that\] are socially
constructed, and memetic variations represent different voices and
perspectives'.[^f06_42] Therefore, memes expand the range of political
participation modalities by offering new, playful, and accessible modes
of participation for expressing political opinions and engaging in
debates on current issues. Therefore, we focus on this interdiscursive
dynamic to show how social actors, mostly anonymous, appropriate
discursive fragments from the social fabric, construct different ways of
expressing - through humor - that it is necessary to resist and fight
against Bolsonarism. In this case, the \'Truck Patriot\' meme phenomenon
is unique because it is efficient as a political tool for critique and
ridicule of Bolsonarist fanaticism, and as a way of mobilization against
extremist tendencies towards a more plural internet.

The 'Truck Patriot' meme can be also considered as a cultural phenomenon
that creates new genres within meme typologies. It becomes a kind of
memetic activism, or activism through memes, where memes travel from
screens to the streets and highways and back again (Figure 9). In Gisele
Beiguelman's view, in this process, the interdiscursive phenomenon that
crosses over between digital screen-based mediums and analog
street-based mediums opens up to multiple derivations that break with
systems of representation and their mechanisms of symbolic organization
in both content and form.[^f06_43] Lastly, some \'Truck Patriot\' memes also
incorporate other discourses, information, and political events as
elements of commentary and critique, such as the pandemic and fake news
occurring during the election period or in politics in general. We
notice, for instance, a process of meta-mimesis when it appropriates
other internet genres such as parodies of fake news.[^f06_44]

In these interdiscursive contexts, the \'Truck Patriot\' figure takes on
multiple roles, first as the protagonist, but also as an interdiscursive
device through its role as a double symbol for both democracy and
Bolsonarism, as a supporting character in other memes, as an agent of
political transformation, and as a strategy for resistance.

#### The 'Truck Patriot' meme as a Symbol of Democracy 

![Figura 10: A political cartoon in which the \'truck\' of democracy drives
Bolsonarism off the road. Unknown source.](imgs/06_10.png)

<br/>

![Figure 11: A collage with the Lula's and Bolsonaro's cut-out photographs
on the original video footage. Source: \#*MUSEUdeMEMES*.[^f06_45]](imgs/06_11.png)

<br/>


When memes cross over to the language of political cartoons, they become
part of the political commentary and *memetize* political discourse.
Here, the meme's main visual elements of the truck, on one hand, and the
Patriot figure, on the other, each acquire opposite meanings. In Figure
7, in a political cartoon the truck becomes a symbol of a strong
democracy on the way to 'crush' the fragile symbol of Bolsonarism
clinging to whatever is left of its anti-democratic values. In Figure 8,
the scene is personified by a cut-out of Lula's campaign photo as a
smiling truck driver, while a desperate Jair Bolsonaro trying to hold on
to the power he just lost. Both images embody the 'aesthetic of a failed
coup'[^f06_46] and the need to get rid of Bolsonaro from the political
scene. This becomes especially funny when we know that Bolsonaro refuses
to acknowledge Lula's victory and 'clings' to power through his most
committed followers.

#### The 'Truck Patriot' Meme as a Supporting Character

![Figure 12: Zambelli's *Abbey Road* meme with the Truck Patriot in the
background. The caption reads, 'Bro!!! This meme only gets
better!!!'.Source: \@annaguirro, Twitter post 5 November 2022.[^f06_47]](imgs/06_12.png)

<br/>

While the 'Truck Patriot' meme circulated mostly as a standalone meme,
in some instances, it was combined with memes with absurd scenes from
the last days of the presidential campaign. In Figure 8, the Truck
Patriot becomes a supporting character in a scene that symbolizes
Bolsonarist anti-democratic, violent, and criminal behaviors. The woman
in the foreground is Congresswoman Carla Zambelli,[^f06_48] one of
Bolsonaro\'s main political allies, caught on video pointing a gun to a
Black journalist and Lula campaigner on the eve of election day, October
29, 2022, in a busy street in São Paulo.[^f06_49] Besides political and
racially motivated violence, the incident gained significant media
attention because Brazilian law forbids the use of firearms by civilians
24 hours before and after election day. Several witnesses captured
images of the Congresswoman and her armed assistants publicly committing
a serious electoral offense. Videos show Zambelli\'s confrontation with
the black journalist, then chasing him, and finally pointing her gun
inside a bar.[^f06_50] A flurry of memes took over social media platforms
during the entire election weekend, and, when the \'Truck Patriot\' meme
appeared a few days later, it was immediately added on to Zambelli's
memes. In Figure 9, Zambelli's green-clad figure holding a gun is pasted
onto The Beatles' iconic album cover *Abbey Road*, pointing her gun at
John Lennon, a well-known pacifist killed by gunshot in 1980, protecting
his bandmates on the crosswalk. The 'Truck Patriot's frontal shot is
pasted in the back coming at full speed in Zambelli's direction.

Zambelli\'s figure represents the symbolic and real violence associated
with the militaristic and nationalist ideals of Bolsonarism, while the
frightened 'Truck Patriot' figure in yellow, carried by the \'democracy
truck\', symbolizes Bolsonaro\'s defeat. Furthermore, we understand that
although the Truck Patriot is a minor character in pictorial terms as it
is seen in the background, it will soon crush Zambelli in the
foreground. When combined, these two absurd scenes represent how the
Bolsonarist movement tends to turn against itself without the need for
the opposition to take on the task. Moreover, the meme expresses a type
of humor that not only serves as an easy laugh but also reflects deeper
sentiments, perhaps a kind of \'democratic revenge\' and the desire of
many Brazilians to expel Bolsonarism and \'run over\' its leadership and
allies.

#### The Truck Patriot as an Agent of Political Transformation

![Figure 13: Photo collage of the National Congress in Brasília, where the
\'Truck Patriot\' is depicted on a collision course with Jair Bolsonaro
and Carla Zambelli. The caption reads 'Brazil, 2022. Rioters on panel.',
in the style of image captions given to artworks. Credit:
\@deyvidbacelar.[^f06_51]](imgs/06_13.png)

<br/>



Another meme shows Carla Zambelli running with a gun, followed by Jair
Bolsonaro and the 'Truck Patriot' frozen in motion in what looks like a
still shot of an action scene. They seem to be running off in
desperation out of the frame as if being chased away from power for
their political misconduct. The scene is set against the background of
the Brazilian Congress in Brasilia, the same site of the insurrection
that would take place two months later, on January 8, 2023. Using the
typical meme 'deep-fried' aesthetic of quick, low-quality collage style,
the fragments gathered from different sources are cut out from their
original contexts and pasted together to generate new
interdiscursivities and resignifications. In Figure 10, the caption
describes the image as a work of art, 'Brazil, 2022. Rioters on panel'
as a kind of 'ironic sublime' that underscores the picturesque quality
of the scene. Moreover, the caricatural quality of all three figures
enhances the scene's comic effect, aiming to demoralize Bolsonaro and
oust Bolsonarist politicians in general. In addition, the scene gives a
sense of collective catharsis and the pursuit of justice against
political figures considered to be criminals by their opponents. The
'Truck Patriot' here represents how Bolsonarist's tactics have turned
against themselves. The dissident truck represents force making the
politicians run away, and help transform the political situation. The
meme also expresses a desire for Brasilia to become inhabited by a new
president and a government that respects the rights of Brazilians and
their democratic institutions.

#### The 'Truck Patriot' meme as Meme-activist Resistance

Following Lula\'s democratic victory, producing and circulating the
'Truck Patriot' meme became an act of resistance strategy to attempt to
reverse the \'culture war\' that Bolsonarists had declared against all
their opponents in previous years. Since the left had been on the
defensive for four years, it now could regain an upper hand by exposing
the ridiculousness of Bolsonarists while reinforcing bonds of
solidarity. This practice had earlier been observed during the COVID-19
pandemic when Brazilians mobilized different discursive materials in the
form of critical memes and laughter as a form of resistance against
Bolsonaro\'s negationist stance towards the pandemic and his ineffective
government.[^f06_52]

![Figure 14: (left) \'Nobody lets go of anyone\'s hand\' was a meme and
slogan created during the 2018 election, inspired by collectivist and
intersectional ideals symbolizing the unity of the left against
Bolsonarism. (right) An ironic reinterpretation adapted from the 2018
meme, this time featuring the Truck Patriot, saying 'No one lets go from
the truck'. Source: unknown.](imgs/06_14.png)

<br/>



Besides a need to celebrate Lula's victory in the elections, the 'Truck
Patriot' meme was important to communicate the need to stay together to
confront the ongoing acts threatening democracy. The reconfiguration of
an iconic meme of resistance against Bolsonaro's victory in 2018 (Figure
11, left) was updated to reflect the 'Truck Patriot' meme phenomenon
that characterized Bolsonaro's defeat in 2022 (Figure 11, right). In
both images, the image of joined hands remains, yet the pictorial
element and the words are changed to signify the success of the critical
voice of the resistance against Bolsonarism. Using self-parody, the rose
is replaced with a drawing of the truck with the Patriot, and the word
'hand' is replaced by the word for 'truck'. But in the second image, the
hands and the words are doing different things. If in the first image, '
no one lets go of anyone's hand' means 'we stick together, no matter
what', in the second there is an ironic reversal where the words say 'no
one lets go of the truck' where 'no one' means that the Bolsonaristas
clinging to their illusions. A new discursive unity is thus created
through the replication of some verbal elements and the substitution of
iconography as a one-liner joke that proposes a reversal of meanings.

This self-appropriative gesture suggests the continuity of memetic
activism that reinforces bonds of unity and solidarity, needed to
demarcate a discursive territory of humor as a form of ideological and
media superiority over the opposing side. If, during Bolsonaro's
extreme-right government memes were used by right-wingers for political
propaganda, the left reacted by using memes to express resistance. The
'Truck Patriot' meme became an essential discursive device for the left
to express itself not only against the anti-democratic acts in front of
the barracks but especially to articulate strategies to combat ongoing
threats of coup attempts and military interventions.

## Conclusion

The memetization of the man clinging to the truck indicates two
codependent movements. While the left\'s humor and meme creativity
promoted a sense of relief and emancipation from Bolsonarism\'s
dominance on social media and in the cultural imaginary, it also fueled
a growing resentment and anger among Bolsonarists, as their protests
escalated into various anti-democratic actions in the post-election
period. Nonetheless, from the left\'s perspective, the strengthening of
its oppositional voice immediately after the election was empowered by a
'memetic turn' with the help of the 'Truck Patriot' memes. It gave the
winning majority a possibility to take back media space and discourses
that had been suppressed during the Bolsonaro government and its fake
news machinery. The Truck Patriot meme also became a cathartic
collective online celebration of Lula\'s victory over Bolsonaro and
empowered the new majority, making Brazilians able to laugh openly and
collectively again, following cultural tropes and the central role of
humor in the Brazilian psyche.

Despite the broad popular struggle of the left and the imaginative
expressions of the 'Truck Patriot' meme, it did not deter the
continuation of Bolsonarist anti-democratic tactics. In fact, the 'Truck
Patriot' meme was co-opted by Bolsonarists to exalt the symbolic figure
of the 'Patriot', as seen in new profiles or renaming old accounts on
Twitter with variations of \'@patriotadocaminhao\' which elevated the
yellow-clad patriot figure as a heroic symbol of far-right
mobilizations. Indeed, in the following months, Bolsonarists continued
their practices of disseminating false messages on social media and
messaging apps demanding a military intervention. By targeting specific
groups on WhatsApp and Telegram specifically in strategic sectors such
as agribusiness and the cargo transportation sector, which includes
thousands of truck drivers and powerful financiers, they were able to
mobilize protesters toward what eventually resulted in the Planalto
Riots on January 8, 2023. Nonetheless, the 'Truck Patriot' remains a
symbol of the inventiveness of the Brazilian internet and the new social
imaginary created during a turbulent period in Brazilian political
history signifying the power shift from an anti-democratic to a
democratic government with Lula's victory.

## Bibliography

\@AndreJanonesAdv, Twitter profile.

\@annaguirro, 'Mano!!! Esse meme só melhora!!! #ZambelliNaCadeia
#PatriotaDoCaminhao', Twitter post, 5 November, 2022, 3:11 AM,
<https://twitter.com/annaguirro/status/1588715480969535489>.

'Bolsonaristas se reuniram em atos antidemocráticos em 24 estados e no
DF', G1, 3 November 2022,
<https://g1.globo.com/politica/eleicoes/2022/noticia/2022/11/02/atos-bolsonaristas-quarteis-brasil.ghtml>.

Beiguelman, Giselle. Políticas da Imagem: Vigilância e Resistência na
Dadosfera. São Paulo: Ubu Editora, 2021.

Borelli, Viviane, and Regiani, Herivelto. 'Memetizing and Mediatizing:
Memes as an Evangelical Discursive Strategy'. ESSACHESS - Journal for
Communication Studies, 10.2 (2017): 9— 31.

\_\_\_\_\_\_, Dalmolin, Aline, Feliciano, M.Z., and Regiani, Herivelto.
'O Riso como Resistência: Memes contra Bolsonaro no Contexto da
Pandemia', in *Anais do 44º Congresso brasileiro de ciências da
comunicação* *INTERCOM*, Recife, Brasil, 2021: 1-15,
https://www.portalintercom.org.br/anais/nacional2021/resumos/dt8-ci/herivelton-regiani.pdf.

Bolada, Dandara. 'O Patriota do Caminhão',#*MUSEUdeMEMES*, 2022,
https://museudememes.com.br/collection/patriota-do-caminhao.

'Bora Bill, Scooby travando, patriota do caminhão: relembre memes de
2022 que fizeram o Brasil sorrir', G1, 15 December 2022,
https://gshow.globo.com/tudo-mais/viralizou/noticia/relembre-os-memes-que-movimentaram-as-redes-sociais-em-2022.ghtml.

Brito, Fernando. 'Desova de Bolsonaro começa e já vai ao ridículo',
*Tijolaço*, 5 November 2022,
https://tijolaco.net/desova-de-bolsonaro-comeca-e-ja-vai-ao-ridiculo/.

Braga, José Luiz. 'Dispositivos interacionais; Circuitos de
Comunicação', in José Luiz Braga e R. Calazans (eds.), *Matrizes
Interacionais: A Comunicação Constrói a Sociedade*, Campina Grande:
EDUEPB, Vol. 2, 2017, pp. 15— 64.

Calgaro, Fernando. 'Bloqueios bolsonaristas: quais são as penas
previstas para interdição de rodovias', *G1*, 1 November 2022,
https://g1.globo.com/politica/eleicoes/noticia/2022/11/01/bloqueios-bolsonaristas-quais-sao-as-penas-previstas-para-interdicao-de-rodovias.ghtml.

'Cena de 'patriota em caminhão' em memes', \@folha Twitter post, 4
November 2022, 11:20PM,
https://twitter.com/folha/status/1588657529210507265.

\@deyvidbacelar., 'Brasil, 2022. Golpistas sobre tela', Twitter post, 5
November 2022, 1:21 AM,
https://twitter.com/deyvidbacelar/status/1588687985758781440.

DCM TV, 'Bolsonarista fica pendurado em para-brisa de caminhão que furou
bloqueio golpista', *DCM TV*, YouTube video, 1:33, 3 November 2022,

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qmIGA9r455w.

'Do patriota do caminhão à tapioca homofóbica: relembre os memes de
2022', Folha de S. Paulo, 15 December 2022,
https://www1.folha.uol.com.br/blogs/hashtag/2022/12/do-patriota-do-caminhao-a-tapioca-homofobica-relembre-os-memes-de-2022.shtml.

Domingos, Roney. 'É fake que 51 milhões de votos foram roubados de
Bolsonaro', *G1*,

1 November 2022.

https://g1.globo.com/fato-ou-fake/eleicoes/noticia/2022/11/07/e-fake-que-51-mihoes-de-votos-foram-roubados-de-bolsonaro.ghtml.

\@Drifez_original, 'E vamos de patriota do caminhão chegando a borda da
terra plana', Twitter post, 6 November 2022, 11:12 AM,
https://twitter.com/Drifez_original/status/1589199155347755013.

'É fake que 51 milhões de votos foram roubados de Bolsonaro', G1, 1
November 2022,
https://g1.globo.com/fato-ou-fake/eleicoes/noticia/2022/11/07/e-fake-que-51-mihoes-de-votos-foram-roubados-de-bolsonaro.ghtml.

\@felipeneto, Twitter profile.

\@felipeneto, 'Edição urgente do BIP! Conseguimos atualizações sobre o
Patriota do Caminhão\... Compartilhe.', Twitter post, 4 November 2022,
11:20 AM, https://twitter.com/i/status/1588657456137355266.

G1, 'Bolsonaristas se reuniram em atos antidemocráticos em 24 estados e
no DF', *G1*,

2 November, 2022,
https://g1.globo.com/politica/eleicoes/2022/noticia/2022/11/02/atos-bolsonaristas-quarteis-brasil.ghtml.

'Governo Bolsonaro liberou em média 619 novas armas por dia para CACs:
57% dos registros foram em 2022', G1, 19 January 2023,
https://g1.globo.com/politica/noticia/2023/01/19/governo-bolsonaro-liberou-em-media-619-novas-armas-por-dia-para-cacs-47percent-dos-registros-foram-em-2022.ghtml.

Gonçalves, Andre Luiz Dias. 'WhatsApp é o app mais popular do Brasil;
veja o top 10', Tecmundo, 8 January 2022,
https://www.tecmundo.com.br/dispositivos-moveis/231633-whatsapp-app-popular-brasil-veja-o-top-10.html.

Horbyk, Roman, Löfgren, Isabel, Soriano, Cheryl, and Prymashenko,Yana.
'Fake News as Meta-mimesis: Imitative Genres and Storytelling in the
Philippines, Brazil, Russia and Ukraine', *Popular Inquiry —  The
Journal of the Aesthetics of Kitsch, Camp and Mass Culture* 8 (2021).

\@joaorzc, 'Desculpa chegar atrasado pro meme do patriota, gente. É que
eu vim de trem. \"L\'Arrivée d\'un patriote en gare de La Ciotat\".
Irmãos Lumière, 1985.', Twitter post, 9 November, 2022, 9:22 AM,
https://twitter.com/joaorzc/status/1590394436814413824.

Lacombe, Milly. 'O patriota do caminhão é a estética de um golpe
fracassado', *Uol*, 4 November 2022,
UoL https://www.uol.com.br/esporte/colunas/milly-lacombe/2022/11/04/o-patriota-preso-ao-caminhao-e-a-estetica-de-um-golpe-fracassado.html.

Löfgren, Isabel. 'Memes as means of public dissent and cultural
resistance in the post-electoral period in Brazil', Urgent Publishing,
Institute of Network Cultures, Arnhem, Holland, 19 May 2019,
https://vimeo.com/345459399.

— — — — — — — . 'Semiotics of Care and Violence: Memetization and
Necropolitics during the Brazilian 2018 Elections and the action
#MarielleMultiplica', in Chloë Arkenbout and Laurence Sherz (eds),
*Critical Meme Reader 2: Memetic Tacticality*, Amsterdam: Institute of
Network Cultures, 2022, pp. 52-75.

Lima, Mateus. 'Patriota do Caminhão/Truck's Patriot: part of a series on
2022 Brazilian General Election', *Know Your Meme*, 10 December 2022,
https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/patriota-do-caminhao-trucks-patriot.

Monitor de Whatsapp, http://www.monitor-de-whatsapp.dcc.ufmg.br/.

\@Mayhem_AQ3D, 'He passed by me too', Twitter post, 9 November 2022,
7:01PM, https://twitter.com/Mayhem_AQ3D/status/1590404137707270144.

\@NetflixBrasil, 'Pensando muito nessa cena.', Twitter post, 3 November
2022, 9:17 PM,
[[https://twitter.com/i/status/1588264095580651520]{.underline}](https://twitter.com/i/status/1588264095580651520).

Paiva, Fernado. *Panorama Mobile*

*Time/Opinion Box - Usos de Apps no Brasil*, MobileTime/Opinion Box,
2022, file:///home/araxa/Downloads/Panorama_APPS-DEZ22-OK.pdf.

Pires, Breno. 'O show de Jair —  Como o PT enfrentou a milícia digital
bolsonarista', *Revista Piauí* 195 (December 2022): 24-28.

Propp, Vladimir. *Comicidade e Riso*, Trad. Aurora Fornoni Bernardini e
Homero Freitas de Andrade, São Paulo: Editora Ática, 1976.

Queiroz, Eça de. *AS FARPAS: crônica mensal da política, das letras e
dos costumes*. Lisboa: Tipografia Universal, 1872,
http://purl.pt/256/4/.

Resende, Sara, Vinícius Cassela and José Vianna. 'Atos golpistas: o que
a Abin rastreou sobre financiadores e novas tentativas de ataques',
*G1*, 20 July 2023,
https://g1.globo.com/politica/noticia/2023/07/20/atos-golpistas-o-que-a-abin-rastreou-sobre-financiadores-e-novas-tentativas-de-ataques.ghtml.

Sapio, Marcello e Adriana De Luca. 'Especialistas analisam legalidade de
manifestações bolsonaristas', CNN Brasil, 2 November 2022,
https://www.cnnbrasil.com.br/politica/especialistas-analisam-legalidade-de-manifestacoes-bolsonaristas/.

\@SeJustica, 'ATENÇÃO: Ovni avistado patriotas! Pode ter a ver com o
Ragnarok chegando... #patriotadocaminhao #patriotas #ovni #et #Bolsonaro
#jairbolsonaro #LulaPresidente #Ragnarok', Twitter post, 7 November
2022, 2:39 AM, https://twitter.com/SeJustica/status/1589432382700277762.

Shifman, Limor. *Memes in Digital Culture*, Cambridge: The MIT Press,
2014.

Stabile, Arthur. 'Governo Bolsonaro liberou em média 619 novas armas por
dia para CACs: 57% dos registros foram em 2022', *G1*, 19 January 2023,

https://g1.globo.com/politica/noticia/2023/01/19/governo-bolsonaro-liberou-em-media-619-novas-armas-por-dia-para-cacs-47percent-dos-registros-foram-em-2022.ghtml.

UOL, 'Pronunciamento de Bolsonaro: veja o discurso completo do
presidente após derrota nas eleições', YouTube video, 2:28, 1 November
2022, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Ywjzf88oWY.

UOL,'Vídeo flagra homem preso a caminhão após veículo furar bloqueio',
UOL, YouTube video, 1:30, 3 November 2022,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qmIGA9r455w.

Verón, Eliseo. *Fragmentos de um tecido*. São Leopoldo: Unisinos, 2004.

Teodoro, Plinio, 'Vídeo: bolsonarista do caminhão vira cenário para
Primavera Sound'. *Revista Fórum*, 6 November 2022,
https://revistaforum.com.br/cultura/2022/11/6/video-bolsonarista-do-caminho-vira-cenario-para-primavera-sound-126045.html.

Wikipedia contributors, 'Patriota do Caminhão', 15 November 2022,
https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patriota_do_caminh%C3%A3o, accessed 10
October, 2023.



[^f06_3]: Eça de Queiroz, *AS FARPAS: crônica mensal da politica, das letras
    e dos costume*s. Lisboa: Tipografia Universal, fevereiro de 1872,
    http://purl.pt/256/4/.

[^f06_4]: These 72 hours were repeatedly postponed in the following months,
    keeping the expectations of the protesters alive until the attempted
    coup on January 8, 2023.

[^f06_5]: In late May 2023, the parliamentary investigation commission of
    coup-related acts (CPI dos atos golpistas) released documents that
    reveal the names of those who financed the coup attempt. See Sara
    Resende, Vinícius Cassela and José Vianna, 'Atos golpistas: o que a
    Abin rastreou sobre financiadores e novas tentativas de ataques',
    *G1*, 20 July 2023,
    https://g1.globo.com/politica/noticia/2023/07/20/atos-golpistas-o-que-a-abin-rastreou-sobre-financiadores-e-novas-tentativas-de-ataques.ghtml.

[^f06_6]: UOL, 'Pronunciamento de Bolsonaro: veja o discurso completo do
    presidente após derrota nas eleições', YouTube video, 2:28, 1
    November 2022, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Ywjzf88oWY.

[^f06_7]: Isabel Löfgren, *Memes as means of public dissent and cultural
    resistance in the post-electoral period in Brazil*, Urgent
    Publishing, Institute of Network Cultures, Arnhem, Holland, 19 May
    2019. https://vimeo.com/345459399.

[^f06_8]: Breno Pires, 'O show de Jair —  Como o PT enfrentou a milícia
    digital bolsonarista', *Revista Piauí* Vol. 195, (Dezembro 2022):
    24— 28.

[^f06_9]: \@AndreJanonesAdv, Twitter profile; \@felipeneto, Twitter profile.

[^f06_10]: Pires, 'O show de Jair', p. 26.

[^f06_11]: On the day of Bolsonaro's reappearance, *G1,* the largest online
    news portal in Brazil owned by the Globo, fact-checked false
    information circulating on Telegram, WhatsApp, Facebook, Instagram,
    TikTok, and YouTube, such as claims of election fraud. Roney
    Domingos, 'É fake que 51 milhões de votos foram roubados de
    Bolsonaro', *G1*, 1 November 2022.
    https://g1.globo.com/fato-ou-fake/eleicoes/noticia/2022/11/07/e-fake-que-51-mihoes-de-votos-foram-roubados-de-bolsonaro.ghtml.

[^f06_12]: Voting in Brazil is mandatory and carried out via electronic
    voting stations.

[^f06_13]: The truckers\' participation was significant since the time of
    the year was considered the \'off-season,\' meaning that at that
    moment, many truck drivers who primarily transport grain had no
    cargo to carry. This fact is believed to have contributed to a
    higher level of participation from the sector in the protests
    against the election results and the subsequent blockades of roads
    across virtually the entire national territory. Another significant
    demonstration took place on November 15, a national holiday, when
    thousands of people dressed in green and yellow gathered in the
    streets of Brazilian state capitals. However, this time, the
    radicals did not have the support of the truckers, as it was
    necessary to resume transportation of goods on Brazilian roads.

[^f06_14]: The Federal Highway Police (PRF) is the government authority
    responsible for road management across the country. Even though the
    PRF stated in a press release that they were taking action against
    protesters, their permissive stance was immediately questioned.
    Marcello Sapio e Adriana De Luca, 'Especialistas analisam legalidade
    de manifestações bolsonaristas', *CNN Brasil*, 2 November 2022,
    https://www.cnnbrasil.com.br/politica/especialistas-analisam-legalidade-de-manifestacoes-bolsonaristas/.

[^f06_15]: The media published news regarding the penalties outlined for the
    blockades on the highways at that time. Fernando Calgaro, 'Bloqueios
    bolsonaristas: quais são as penas previstas para interdição de
    rodovias', *G1*, 1 November 2022,
    https://g1.globo.com/politica/eleicoes/noticia/2022/11/01/bloqueios-bolsonaristas-quais-sao-as-penas-previstas-para-interdicao-de-rodovias.ghtml.

[^f06_16]: Blockades were reported in 24 Brazilian states and the Federal
    District. Brazil has a total of 26 states, in addition to the
    Federal District. The protests on November 2, 2022, occurred in
    hundreds of Brazilian cities that have military bases.G1,
    'Bolsonaristas se reuniram em atos antidemocráticos em 24 estados e
    no DF', *G1*, 2 November, 2022,
    https://g1.globo.com/politica/eleicoes/2022/noticia/2022/11/02/atos-bolsonaristas-quarteis-brasil.ghtml.

[^f06_17]: These actions included religious expressions (with symbols from
    various religious beliefs but not necessarily institutionalized)
    such as prayers and hymns of praise around burning tires on the
    roads. Later on, protesters decided to organize demonstrations in
    front of military barracks which often became more esoteric. Flash
    mobs were used to communicate 'with the beyond' by crowds emitting
    signals with mobile phone flashlights towards the sky, hoping that
    aliens in outer space could hear their desperate pleas for military
    intervention. These and many other highly performative
    Bolsonaro-supporting demonstrations revealed how the movement is
    well-organized in terms of activism, logistics, and media apparatus,
    but also equally absurd in terms of fanatic engagement. Monitoring
    conducted by Professor Fabricio Bevenuto de Souza from UFMG (Federal
    University of Minas Gerais) showed such movements during the
    elections. Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, 'Monitor de
    Whatsapp', http://www.monitor-de-whatsapp.dcc.ufmg.br/.

[^f06_18]: Mateus Almeida and Marcos Noronha, 'Bora Bill, Scooby travando,
    patriota do caminhão: relembre memes de 2022 que fizeram o Brasil
    sorrir', Gshow, 15 December 2022,
    https://gshow.globo.com/tudo-mais/viralizou/noticia/relembre-os-memes-que-movimentaram-as-redes-sociais-em-2022.ghtml;
    and Rebeca Oliveira, 'Do patriota do caminhão á tapioca homofóbica:
    relembre os memes de 2022', Folha de S. Paulo, 23 December 2022,
    https://www1.folha.uol.com.br/blogs/hashtag/2022/12/do-patriota-do-caminhao-a-tapioca-homofobica-relembre-os-memes-de-2022.shtml.

[^f06_19]: UOL,'Vídeo flagra homem preso a caminhão após veículo furar
    bloqueio', UOL, YouTube video, 1:30, 3 November 2022,
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qmIGA9r455w.

[^f06_20]: DCM TV, 'Bolsonarista fica pendurado em para-brisa de caminhão
    que furou bloqueio golpista', *DCM T*V, YouTube video, 1:33, 3
    November 2022, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qmIGA9r455w.

[^f06_21]: The most popular platforms in Brazil are WhatsApp (54%),
    Instagram (42%), Facebook (33%), followed by Youtube, Twitter, and
    Telegram. Fernando Paiva, Panorama Mobile Time/Opinion Box - Usos de
    Apps no Brasil, MobileTime/Opinion Box, 2022,
    file:///home/araxa/Downloads/Panorama_APPS-DEZ22-OK.pdf; and André
    Luiz Dias Gonçalves,'WhatsApp é o app mais popular do Brasil; veja o
    top 10', Tecmundo, 8 January 2022,
    https://www.tecmundo.com.br/dispositivos-moveis/231633-whatsapp-app-popular-brasil-veja-o-top-10.hmt.

[^f06_22]: Mateus Lima, 'Patriota do Caminhão/Truck's Patriot: part of a
    series on 2022 Brazilian General Election', *Know Your Meme*, 10
    December 2022,
    https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/patriota-do-caminhao-trucks-patriot.

[^f06_23]: \@felipeneto, 'Edição urgente do BIP! Conseguimos atualizações
    sobre o Patriota do Caminhão\... Compartilhe.', Twitter post, 4 de
    novembro de 2022, 11:20 AM,
    https://twitter.com/i/status/1588657456137355266.

[^f06_24]: The \'Truck Patriot\' meme has its own entryin the
    \#*MUSEUdeMEMES* collection, a Brazilian meme collection project
    developed by coLAB - Laboratory for Research in Communication,
    Political Cultures, and Collaborative Economics at UFF (Universidade
    Federal Fluminense). Dandara Bolada, 'O Patriota do Caminhão',
    \#*MUSEUdeMEMES*, 2022,
    https://museudememes.com.br/collection/patriota-do-caminhao.

[^f06_25]: Wikipedia contributors, 'Patriota do Caminhão', 15 November 2022,
    https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patriota_do_caminh%C3%A3o, accessed 10
    October, 2023.

[^f06_26]: Eliseo Verón, *La semiosis social. Fragmentos de una teoría de la
    discursividad*. Barcelona: Gedisa, 1996.

[^f06_27]: Vladimir Propp. *Comicidade e riso*, trans. Aurora Fornoni
    Bernardini e Homero Freitas de Andrade. São Paulo: Editora Ática,
    1976.

[^f06_28]: In the media sensation that followed, Júnior César Peixoto gave
    interviews to television channels, news portals, newspapers, and
    magazines, stating that he was in fear for his life thinking he
    would die, and asked the driver to stop. However, the truck driver
    claimed at the time that he had stopped and asked the protester to
    get off, which did not happen. The media coverage also had an impact
    on his private life, as he became a subject of mockery: he deleted
    his Facebook account and made his Instagram profile private. Later
    on, he capitalized on the situation to become a micro-celebrity
    within pro-Bolsonaro circles, becoming an example of a dedicated
    patriot whose resilience in surviving this adventure became a symbol
    of sacrifice and commitment to the Bolsonaro cause.

[^f06_29]: Limor Shifman, *Memes in Digital Culture*, Cambridge:The MIT
    Press, 2014.

[^f06_30]: \@SeJustica, 'ATENÇÃO: Ovni avistado patriotas! Pode ter a ver
    com o Ragnarok chegando... #patriotadocaminhao #patriotas #ovni #et
    #Bolsonaro #jairbolsonaro #LulaPresidente #Ragnarok', Twitter post,
    7 November 2022, 2:39 AM,
    https://twitter.com/SeJustica/status/1589432382700277762.

[^f06_31]: \@NetflixBrasil, 'Pensando muito nessa cena.', Twitter post, 3
    November 2022, 9:17 PM,
    https://twitter.com/i/status/1588264095580651520.

[^f06_32]: \@joaorzc, 'Desculpa chegar atrasado pro meme do patriota, gente.
    É que eu vim de trem. \"L\'Arrivée d\'un patriote en gare de La
    Ciotat\". Irmãos Lumière, 1985.', Twitter post, 9 November, 2022,
    9:22 AM, https://twitter.com/joaorzc/status/1590394436814413824.

[^f06_33]: \@NetflixBrasil, 'Pensando muito nessa cena.'.

[^f06_34]: \@folha, 'Cena de 'patriota em caminhão' em memes', Twitter post,
    4 November 2022, 11:20PM,
    https://twitter.com/folha/status/1588657529210507265.

[^f06_35]: \@Drifez_original, 'E vamos de patriota do caminhão chegando a
    borda da terra plana', Twitter post, 6 November 2022, 11:12 AM,
    https://twitter.com/Drifez_original/status/1589199155347755013.

[^f06_36]: \@Mayhem_AQ3D, 'He passed by me too', Twitter post, 9 November
    2022, 7:01PM,
    https://twitter.com/Mayhem_AQ3D/status/1590404137707270144.

[^f06_37]: Plinio Teodoro, 'Vídeo bolsonarista do caminhão vira cenário para
    Primavera Sound'. *Revista Fórum*, 6 November, 2022,
    https://revistaforum.com.br/cultura/2022/11/6/video-bolsonarista-do-caminho-vira-cenario-para-primavera-sound-126045.html.

[^f06_38]: José Luiz Braga, 'Dispositivos interacionais; Circuitos de
    Comunicação', in José Luiz Braga e R. Calazans (eds.) *Matrizes
    Interacionais: A Comunicação Constrói a Sociedade*, vol.2, Campina
    Grande: EDUEPB, 2017, pp. 15-64.

[^f06_39]: Viviane Borelli and Herivelton Regiani, 'Memetizing and
    Mediatizing: Memes as an Evangelical Discursive Strategy'.
    *ESSACHESS - Journal for Communication Studies* 10 (2017): 9-31, and

    Isabel Löfgren, 'Semiotics of Care and Violence: Memetization and
    Necropolitics during the Brazilian 2018 Elections and the action
    #MarielleMultiplica', In Chloë Arkenbout and Laurence Sherz (eds.),
    *Critical Meme Reader 2: Memetic Tacticality*, Amsterdam: Institute
    of Network Cultures, 2022, pp. 52-75

[^f06_40]: Eliseo Verón, *Fragmentos de um tecido*, São Leopoldo: Unisinos,
    2004, p.69.

[^f06_41]: Verón, *Fragmentos de um tecido*, p.69.

[^f06_42]: Shifman, *Memes in Digital Culture*, p.8.

[^f06_43]: Giselle Beiguelman, *Políticas da Imagem: Vigilância e
    Resistência na Dadosfera*. São Paulo: Ubu Editora, 2021.

[^f06_44]: Roman Horbyk, Isabel Löfgren, Cheryl Soriano, and Yana
    Prymashenko, 'Fake News as Meta-mimesis:

    Imitative Genres and Storytelling in the Philippines, Brazil, Russia
    and Ukraine', Popular Inquiry: t*he*

    *Journal of the Aesthetics of Kitsch, Camp and Mass Culture* 8.1
    (2021): 30-54.

[^f06_45]: Fernando Brito, 'Desova de Bolsonaro começa e já vai ao
    ridículo', Tijolaço, 5 November 2022,
    https://tijolaco.net/desova-de-bolsonaro-comeca-e-ja-vai-ao-ridiculo/.

[^f06_46]: Milly Lacombe, 'O patriota do caminhão é a estética de um golpe
    fracassado', *UOL*, 4 November 2022,
    UoLhttps://www.uol.com.br/esporte/colunas/milly-lacombe/2022/11/04/o-patriota-preso-ao-caminhao-e-a-estetica-de-um-golpe-fracassado.htm.

[^f06_47]: \@annaguirro, 'Mano!!! Esse meme só melhora!!! #ZambelliNaCadeia
    #PatriotaDoCaminhao', Twitter post, 5 November 2022, 3:11 AM,
    https://twitter.com/annaguirro/status/1588715480969535489

[^f06_48]: Carla Zambelli is a Federal Deputy from the PL (Liberal Party), a
    party allied with Jair Bolsonaro.

[^f06_49]: It\'s important to note that, like the Congresswoman who owns
    three registered firearms, thousands of people celebrated the
    deregulation of gun ownership during the Bolsonaro government. The
    so-called 'CACs' - an acronym for 'hunters, shooters, and
    collectors' in Portuguese - started obtaining gun licenses that were
    never previously allowed by Brazilian legislation. According to data
    released in January 2023 by *G1*, a Globo news portal, between 2019
    and 2022, 904,858 gun licenses were issued, or 619 new guns per day,
    for four years. Arthur Stabile, 'Governo Bolsonaro liberou em média
    619 novas armas por dia para CACs: 57% dos registros foram em 2022',
    *G1*, 19 January 2023,
    https://g1.globo.com/politica/noticia/2023/01/19/governo-bolsonaro-liberou-em-media-619-novas-armas-por-dia-para-cacs-47percent-dos-registros-foram-em-2022.ghtml.

[^f06_50]: Even though Zambelli claims she had been initially pushed and
    attacked by Lula's supporters, most of the video footage shows her
    running and carrying a pistol.

[^f06_51]: \@deyvidbacelar., 'Brasil, 2022. Golpistas sobre tela', Twitter
    post, 5 November 2022, 1:21 AM,
    https://twitter.com/deyvidbacelar/status/1588687985758781440.

[^f06_52]: Viviane Borelli, Aline Dalmolin, M.Z. Feliciani, Herivelto
    Regiani, 'O Riso como Resistência: Memes contra Bolsonaro no
    Contexto da Pandemia', A*nais do 44º Congresso brasileiro de
    ciências da comunicação - INTERCOM*, Recife, Brasil, October 2021,
    https://www.portalintercom.org.br/anais/nacional2021/resumos/dt8-ci/herivelton-regiani.pdf.
