---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# The March on Brasilia: An Interpretation of Bolsonarist Actions in Preparation for the January 8, 2023 Insurrection

### Apoena C. Cosenza[^1]

## Introduction

On January 8, 2023, demonstrators attacked and occupied government
buildings in Brasília. The event was described by analysts and
commentators as a coup act. Since the 2022 presidential elections, won
by Luís Inácio Lula da Silva, supporters of former President Jair
Bolsonaro have refused to recognize election results, claiming that
those were rigged. They camped in front of barracks[^2] and called on
the armed forces to carry out a coup d'état. On January 8, part of the
camped protesters went to the Legislative Chamber and Planalto Palace,
the presidential headquarters in Brazil, and invaded these two
buildings. They expected the army to support them. The coup never took
place, the police reacted by arresting demonstrators and clearing the
camps. This historical event can be interpreted in different ways. One
of them is that it was not actually a coup attempt. It is a popular
insurrection of the fascist type far-right.

In this chapter, I will seek to present an interpretation of the
Bolsonarist movement as a fascist movement. To this end, I identify the
January 8 insurrection as a *March on Brasilia*, which has parallels
with the October 27, 1922 *March on Rome*. To do so, I start by
presenting a brief analysis of Bolsonarism and the January 8
insurrection. I then discuss the format of agitation and propaganda of
Bolsonarism, ending with a reflection on the organizational
characteristics of Bolsonarism.

## Fascism and the March: Historical Parallels Between Fascism and Bolsonarism

The categorization of Bolsonarism as a type of fascism is nothing new,
and can be supported by different approaches. The approach presented
here allows us to reflect on the militant action by part of the mass
involved in the January 8 insurrection. Starting with an interpretation
about Bolsonarism as fascism, I then discuss the meanings of the March
on Rome and follow with a reflection on the parallel between the March
on Rome and the March on Brasilia.

The definition of what characterizes fascism is a subject of wide
discussion in the fields of history and sociology. One of the possible
definitions comes from Giorgi Dimitrov, responsible for elaborating the
popular front policy (anti-fascist front), that defeated fascism during
World War II. For Dimitrov, fascism was a class alliance formed by the
most chauvinist sector of the *financial bourgeoisie*[^3] allied with
political gangsterism.[^4] Using the concept of *class fraction*,[^5] it
is possible to say that Bolsonarism brings together sectors of the
commercial bourgeoisie, the financial bourgeoisie, the agrarian
oligarchy, and war- and crime lords (the so-called Brazilian
*militias*[^6]). Thus, it expresses the alliance between radical sectors
of the financial bourgeoisie, the old land oligarchy, and political
gangsterism.[^7]

Also from the point of view of aesthetics and political objectives,
Bolsonarism has parallels with fascism. Fascism is an ideology that is
structured in violence around a social mythology and establishing the
State as a historical entity to be glorified.[^8] To garner political
support, Bolsonarism, like fascism, carries out agitation based on myths
and on the violation of the truth.[^9] In fascist ideologies, the leader
of the movement is always treated as a creature that expresses more than
his own humanity. He is no longer seen as a man, and is treated as an
expression of the collective will of the movement. In Italy, Mussolini
was *Il Duce*; in Germany, Hitler was the *Führer*; in Brazil, Bolsonaro
has become *The Myth*. In all cases, the argument of defending the
nation against the communist danger was one of the driving forces of
agitation speeches to mobilize the masses.

Another feature in common between fascism and Bolsonarism is the
distrust on institutions and on the current democracy itself. Both
fascism and Bolsonarism were considered by its followers the true
representatives of the silent majority. Any electoral result that did
not give victory to these movements was considered a misrepresentation
of the true will of the nation.

Mussolini, in his quest for power, sought to amplify the strength of his
*Nation Fascist Party*. He also encouraged the formation of shock
brigades consisting of his militants and supporters, the *squadristi*.
In 1922, fascism was still only a minority in the country's legislature.
But Mussolini and other leading members of the fascist movement were
convinced that the conditions were right for a coup d'état. The plan
involved setting up columns leaving different regions of Italy, taking
strategic posts, until arriving in Rome.[^10] On October 24, in Naples,
Mussolini addressed around sixty thousand blackshirts, a *squadristi*
group, stating that the fascists ‘wanted to govern Italy’. Then he went
to Milan, where he would await the outcome of the coup, ready to flee
the country if it failed. He did not directly participate in the March,
as a way to protect himself from accusations of conspiracy. Between
March 24 and 28, the *squadristi* took strategic posts across Italy.
Their success was more due to the inaction of the police rather than
their own strength. In areas where resistance was encountered, there
were delays. On October 28, only sixteen thousand fascists had arrived
at the meeting points for the march. The forces were not enough for a
confrontation in the capital. But confrontation wasn't necessary. On
that day, King Victor Emmanuel III invited Mussolini to take the role as
head of government. The next day, thirty thousand people marched in
honor of Mussolini.

The absence of political leadership during the marches caused the number
of adherents to drop along its way. The uprising led to a contradictory
situation where the numbers indicate that the march wore out the
mobilization capacity at the same time that it led to the feeling of
strength of the fascists among the public. Afraid of a civil war, Victor
Emmanuel III dismissed the possibility of establishing martial law,
which would allow him to defeat the rebels. The March, therefore, was
not a coup d'état, but the burning of forces that generated the
necessary climate for power to be handed over to Mussolini. Even with
the victory, the fascist force concentrated in Rome was inferior to the
one Mussolini had mobilized four days before.

In Brazil, Bolsonaro did not address his supporters. However, during his
presidential term (2019–2022), he attacked electronic voting machines.
He stated that they were vulnerable to manipulation. He hinted that, if
there were no changes to the electoral system there was a risk that the
election might not be recognized as legitimate. Shortly after the
election results were announced, protesters supporting Bolsonaro started
blocking roads and camped in front of military barracks. They called for
military intervention, imprisonment of federal judges, and annulment of
the election. In other words, they asked the military to interrupt the
democratic process and recognize Bolsonaro's permanence in the
presidency. On December 12th, militants tried to invade the headquarters
of the federal police, without success. On December 24, a protester was
arrested, accused of trying to carry out a terrorist attack. Arrested,
the demonstrator admitted to being part of a conspiracy conjured up in
the camp located in front of the Army Headquarters. Further, he
acknowledges having received the explosives to be installed and cause
panic, opening the ground for military intervention.[^11]

Bolsonaro did not openly support the activities of the militants.
Instead, he traveled to the USA on December 30th, 2022 after stating
that he would not demobilize the encamped supporters, as he had not
mobilized them himself. Documents arising from subsequent investigations
reveal that between the elections and Bolsonaro’s trip, a draft for a
coup d’état was produced, which was found in the house of Anderson
Torres, former Minister of Justice and Public Security.[^12] A
conversation was also discovered between Colonel Elcio Franco, one of
Jair Bolsonaro’s trusted men, and former Major Ailton Barros, where they
described how to mobilize 1,500 men for a coup.[^13] The entire strategy
involved the army leading the coup, which would be supported by the
population. However, the army's top leadership did not actively join the
conspiracy.

As of January 4, 2023, Bolsonaro still maintained the title of
*President of Brazil* in his Twitter account description[^14]. This was
seen by the demonstrators as a sign that *The Myth* did not recognize
the election, so he was just waiting for the right time to act. That
day, material began circulating on social media and messaging apps
calling for the ‘Green and Yellow Revolution’, to be launched on January
7. The objective was to close down the Congress. On January 6,
protesters' violence against journalists escalated. When questioned, the
militants claimed that the violence was directed against ‘those who
encouraged the fraud’ of the elections. On social media posts, they
promised more violence if the elections were not annulled. Between the
night of January 7 and the first hours of the next day, the insurrection
began. On the 8th, in the morning, Congress was invaded, followed by the
Planalto Palace, and finally the Federal Supreme Court. For the first
few hours, there was little resistance from the police, who appeared
unprepared. But contrary to what the demonstrators expected, the army
did not join the insurrection. In time, the government managed to
regroup its forces, and took the offensive. The insurrection was
dispersed, militants were arrested, and the camps were gradually
dismantled.

The insurrection had emission centers, which advertised the date and
organized the action through social networks. It had a place of
concentration and preparation, which was the field in front of the Army
Headquarters, in Brasilia. However, at the time of action, no prominent
leadership came forward, and the march took place in a disorganized
manner. Once inside the Planalto Palace, instead of organizing a center
of action and power, the demonstrators began to plunder property.
Deprived of strategic cadres[^15] to lead them, and with no one to
deliver the coup for them, the demonstrators had no chance of seizing
power.

The March on Brasilia, the ‘Green and Yellow Revolution’, failed. Not
just because Bolsonaro was unable to seize power, as the March on Rome
would have been too. It failed because the strategy was never to take
power by marching. Just as Mussolini knew that his attempt at a show of
force could cost him an arrest and was already prepared to flee Italy,
the Bolsonarist leadership was worried about defeat and chose not to
participate on the scheduled date. Thus, the failure of the March cannot
be read only from a tactical perspective. This is a strategic defeat of
Bolsonarism. For the plans to work, it would have been necessary for the
country's military leadership to adhere to Bolsonaro and his
dissatisfaction with the elections. There are different reasons why this
adhesion did not occur. A possible interpretation is that Bolsonarism
never delivered a clear political program pointing to a structural
change that would be advantageous for that military leadership and give
it protagonism. It has not been able to produce convincing propaganda to
garner long-term political support from the army head.

## Aspects of Bolsonarist Agitation and Propaganda

One way to research a political dispute is by studying the agitation and
propaganda of the movement we want to understand. This analysis departs
from the conceptualization that Dimitrov and the communists of the
anti-fascist front used, where agitation is understood as all political
action that aims to mobilize the masses for short-term goals, be it a
political demonstration or attraction to some organizational group.
Propaganda indicates the development of a complex set of ideas that
constitute a way of seeing the world that supports a long-term
objective. That is, propaganda is the development of a theory and a
political (or party) program that justifies a power strategy. I argue
here that Bolsonarism is a political movement that has the capacity to
agitate but has limitations in its propaganda policy. For this, we need
to first reflect on the programmatic difference between Bolsonarism and
classic fascism to then touch on the common characteristics between
fascism and Bolsonarism in terms of agitation. Finally, it is necessary
to discuss the use of social networks as a tool for agitation and
organization.

One of the characteristics that distinguishes Nazism and Fascism from
other types of dictatorships is that they are mass movements that are
organized around an ideology with a certain degree of complexity. They
have a political program, declared objectives, and a theory that seeks
to justify the program and objectives. The Nazis had Hitler's Mein Kampf
as their programmatic text. The fascists, on the other hand, until 1933,
did not have a book where the doctrine of fascism was explicit. Instead,
they depended on Mussolini's speeches, and, from 1928, on the ideas
contained in his autobiography. But the doctrinal elements of fascism
were already well known in 1922, when *Il Duce* addressed the
Blackshirts in Naples.

Mussolini already preached that liberal democracy was flawed because it
allowed governments to succeed by deceiving the people and betraying
their homeland and that only strong leadership could express the real
needs of a silent majority and national strength[^16]. Thus, the fascist
doctrine was characterized by elements such as: (a) defense of force as
a legitimate political instrument and of the vote as an instrument of
misrepresentation; (b) elevation of national myths above rational
historical analysis; (c) establishment of the State as the most
important historical actor, to the detriment of the individual or social
classes; and (d) subordination of the economy to politics and morals.
Later, this doctrine would be described as a rupture with the
Enlightenment, with fascism being an anti-liberal and anti-communist
ideology, which subordinates reason to the objectives of the State[^17].
This doctrinal set was strong enough to attract the support of thinkers
during the rise of fascism. Benedetto Croce, for example, supported
Mussolini's March to Rome and would only break with fascism in 1924.

Historical situations are capable of transforming ideas and movements.
Fascism did not exist only in its pure form. It has generated offspring
ideologies that are also called fascism. Among these offspring is a type
of ideology that can be called ‘occupation fascism’. These are movements
or governments that adopt the fascist model of mobilization, have
fascist ideological aspects, but which have, at the core of their
functioning, the belief that the most important historical agent is a
foreign country. These are movements such as the *French People's
Party*, which acted as a collaborationist movement in Nazi-occupied
France during World War II;[^18] the *Personalist Party of Vietnam*,
that was pro-Western and pro-Catholicism during the Vietnam War,[^19]
among others.

In the case of Bolsonarism, one of the possible interpretations is that
Bolsonaro’s speeches express the line of thought of Olavo de Carvalho,
considered the movement’s intelectual guide.[^20] Olavo influenced an
important current of thought among the Brazilian far-right.[^21] Thus,
it is fair to consider him the mind behind Bolsonarist propaganda. His
thought is characterized by being anti-rational and anti-science,
advocating a return late medieval Catholic values.[^22] Thus, he defends
a Christian Brazilian society, strongly linked to Europe and the USA.
This propaganda can explain Bolsonaro’s government strategy for
international relations, for instance, which abandoned the principle of
Brazilian protagonism and sought to align itself with Donald Trump and
the international far-right. Therefore, what we have is a type of
*occupation fascism*, in which the State’s protagonism is exerted not by
the country itself, but by foreign states.

There is, in Bolsonarism, no principle of strengthening Brazil's
economic and military power in the long run. Instead, the defense of the
army and the State took on a tactical approach, being used as a flag of
political agitation. The search for external force helps to understand
why it was strategic for Bolsonaro to obtain support from other
countries for his critique of the electronic ballot box. On July 18,
2022, the then president invited ambassadors to a meeting where he
presented unfounded accusations that electronic voting machines were
unreliable. It was about preparing the ground for a future attempt to
invalidate the elections. This attempt failed, since there was a clear
collective international position contrary to Bolsonaro's arguments. The
US embassy, a country considered an important strategic ally in
Bolsonarist and Olavist thinking, stated the following day that the
electoral system in Brazil was safe.[^23]

One of the main differences between fascism and other far-right
movements is that it is a mass movement. In other words, it uses
organizational and mobilization tools to garner support from the masses.
Here, term ‘agitation’ is used to describe this set of mobilization and
insufflation tools. Although irrationalism was a key element in fascist
propaganda, it reaches its purest form in agitation. Fascism's hate
speech seeks to mobilize the deepest yearnings and place a chosen enemy
as responsible for those yearnings being unable to be met. Thus,
fascists present themselves as the movement that can free the people
from those who oppress the desire of the masses.[^24]

Bolsonarism chose the ‘left’[^25] as its main target, be it in its
general form, or in the form of voters of the Workers’ Party (PT)
candidate. Still, given the institutional resistance it encountered, the
Federal Supreme Court became the target of attacks. In its agitation
pieces circulated on the internet, Bolsonarism sought to build a
narrative in which Lula could bring the ‘PT dictatorship’ in case the
election took place with fraud. To prevent this, it was necessary to
fight, and even close, the STF. With the electoral defeat, this
agitation gained strength. The population was called to strike, stop
roads, and camp in front of barracks. The main slogan was: ‘the
elections were rigged’. Added to it were the words: ‘Lula dictator’,
‘Army, intervene!’, and even ‘close the STF’. The army, in these
agitation pieces, appeared as an extension both of the people’s will and
of Bolsonaro. The real proposition behind this agitation, therefore, is
that the army could empower Bolsonaro *The Myth* to govern and rid the
country of those who stand in the way of the masses’ desires.

In the 1920s and 1930s, newspapers, flyers, and rallies were the tools
of agitation. Bolsonarism, on the other hand, used social networks and
messaging applications to carry out their communication, constituting a
true virtual ecosystem. At the center of this ecosystem are the
so-called ‘big groups’ of the Telegram app,[^26] and some regional
Whatsapp groups. Members of these groups produce and make available
agitation material, such as captioned images, cartoons, videos, or
sensationalist texts. To validate the information, they refer to
ultra-right websites. Audiovisual material is made available via YouTube
or TikTok. This material is then forwarded to sectoral or thematic
groups, and smaller groups, forming a semi-hierarchical communication
network.[^27] Some of the material that is forwarded in groups is
reproduced by members or administrators on social networks, usually
first on Twitter. From there, it is reproduced on Facebook and Instagram
and other channels. This assembled structure, although it relies on a
certain spontaneity of the members to forward the material to other
groups and people, does not completely differ from the structure of
committees, cells, and mass fronts of the traditional fascist parties
(Figure 1). It is a competent and dangerous adaptation, given its
infinitely greater capacity for mobilization. Still, it does not demand
formal commitment from those who become part of the political agitation
machine, often without being fully aware of their actions.

![](media/image1.png){width="4.134027777777778in"
height="3.442361111111111in"}

Figure 1: Representation of Bolsonarist virtual agitation network. Image
by the author.

Given the nature of messaging apps, monitoring to identify shared
content is limited. Only members can view messages. Thus, it is not
possible to carry out a broad search of the content, which gives this
communication structure an almost clandestine aspect. One way to capture
part of this propaganda is by looking at what emerges on open social
media. Twitter, as it serves as an intermediary between message groups
and other social networks, is where agitation content first appears in
the public debate. Therefore, monitoring and analysing this network
allows us to understand some aspects of Bolsonaro supporters’ agitation
practices. One of the possible aspects to investigate is the hypothesis
that the March on Brasilia was planned.

To test this hypotesis, a wide collection of tweets was conducted,
including 162,494 posts on that social network, using some key
terms,[^28] including two that were calls for insurrection: ‘Revolução
Verde Amarelo’ (Green and Yellow Revolution), and the code word ‘Festa
da Selma’ (Selma’s party). The analyzed posts originated from 89,580
different users, and were shared 679,342 times. More than half a million
communicative connections[^29] were observed.

The terms ‘Green and Yellow Revolution’ and ‘Selma’s party’’[^30] are
quite indicative of the preparation process that preceded the
insurrection. From January 4, the term ‘Green Yellow Revolution’ began
to circulate calling for the demonstration on January 7 with the aim of
closing the congress. On January 5, the term ‘Selma’s party’ began to
circulate, with the pre-party scheduled for Saturday January 7, and the
actual party soon after.

![](media/image2.png){width="6.6930555555555555in"
height="3.3472222222222223in"}

Figure 2: Mentions of the term ‘festadaselma’ or ‘Selma’s party’ by the
public on Twitter, from December 26, 2022 to January 10, 2023. Image by
the author using data collected from Twitter.

Figure 2 shows the preparation before January 7, the mobilization during
that day, and then the moment of the insurrection on January 8. During
the preparation, it was said that ‘Selma’s party’ would be matched by
other parties, like ‘Telma’s party’, in São Paulo, and ‘Velma’s party’,
in Rio de Janeiro. But the main one was ‘Selma’s party’ in Brasilia
where the caravans were supposed to go, trying to mobilize at least five
thousand people. It was stated that the intention was to cause disorder
to get the army to act and carry out the coup in Bolsonaro's name,
according to tweets on January 5 and 6. The march did take place on that
day and ‘The Green and Yellow Revolution’, also called ‘Selma’s party’,
was held albeit with fewer participants than expected. The expected coup
did not occur.

## Considerations on the Leadership and Militarism of the Bolsonarist Movement

Interpreting that January 8 was a March on Brasilia, modeled on the
March on Rome, and that Bolsonarism is a movement with fascist aspects,
requires recognizing that it is a movement that has an organizational
structure and a chain of command, although it is not limited to them.

The argument advanced here is that Bolsonarism is a mass ideology, as is
fascism. In the case of Bolsonarism, the mass was mobilized via
messaging apps and social networks and can be divided into two types of
members: the regular militants, who are active members of message
groups, systematically sharing and spreading content; and the
supporters, who receive and only share the content that they are most
interested in. The mobilization of regular members is easier, since they
made Bolsonarist political action the center of their way of life, and
acted as Bolsonarism's tactical cadres. Mobilizing supporters, on the
other hand, proved to be more difficult. Therefore, the mass mobilized
for January 7 and onwards was smaller than expected. In practice, only
part of the regular militants participated.

One factor to be noted is that Mussolini's fascism set up its shock
groups (the *squadristi*). Bolsonarismo has never developed hierarchical
shock groups. There was an effort by the Bolsonaro government to arm
groups of gun collectors, sport shooters, and hunters (CACs in the
Portuguese acronym), in the expectation that members of shooting clubs
would form the shock groups. But CACs were never effectively organized
into a command structure. Moreover, the criminal militias, to which the
Bolsonaro family and some Bolsonaristas are accused of having a
connection, were not politically mobilized to carry out the March.

According to Colonel Jorge Eduardo Naime, there were militants with
guerrilla training in the insurrection on January 8.[^31] But these
militants were not organized into commanded combat groups subordinate to
strategic leadership. There was no military command structure. There was
no objective for the insurrection to carry out a coup, since the means
for that were not mobilized. The insurrection should serve to legitimize
the action of the strategic leaders, to encourage the army to carry out
the coup in the name of the movement. But there was no command structure
that made it possible to articulate the two things: the insurrection and
the subsequent coup.

These strategic leaderships can be divided into two groups: militant
leadership and military leadership. The militant leadership was composed
of civilian cadres, whether they were deputies, political advisers, and
low-level military personnel. In practice, they are those who organize
Bolsonarism as a movement. In addition to the Bolsonaro family, people
like Anderson Torres, Colonel Elcio Franco, and Ailton Barros, were part
of the first echelon of leadership, between December 2022 and January
2023. This leadership bet on the strategy for taking power by trying to
co-opt the high command of the army so they would deliver the coup and
hand over power to Bolsonaro. Therefore, they only acted in the sense of
mobilizing the population to put pressure on the army, while attempting
to conspire with the army’s high command. On the day of the uprising,
this militant leadership chose to be absent, to try to preserve itself
in case everything went wrong.

The military leadership would be composed of the high command of the
army, with whom Bolsonaro had good dialogue during his government.
Although they participated in the government, and showed sympathy for
Bolsonaro's political style, there was no complete adherence to
Bolsonarism. In practice, Bolsonarism considered that the Brazilian
State was not the main agent in the international struggle for a Western
World Order. Instead, Bolsonarism sought validation from foreign forces,
including the US. When representatives of US diplomacy made it clear
that they considered the Brazilian election to be legitimate, the
Brazilian military leadership understood that the main force that could
support them would not legitimize a coup in Brazil. Thus, the army high
command had no interest in carrying out a coup, and would only do so
under clear orders from Bolsonaro, while he was still in power.
Bolsonaro, like Mussolini, feared defeat. Mussolini gave the order and
prepared to flee. Bolsonaro fled without ever giving the order, only
leaving it implied. With that, he prevented the direct involvement of
the strategic leadership for the seizure of power, and sealed the fate
of the March to Brasilia, which would only be an ultra-right
insurrection, with no chance of victory. He condemned it to be known by
the pejorative name *of Revolta dos Manés* (The Fool’s Revolt).

## Bibliography

Albanese, Giulia. *The March on Rome: Violence and the Rise of Italian
Fascism*. Routledge, 2019.

Calil, Gilberto. ‘Olavo de Carvalho e a ascensão da
extrema-direita’,* Argumentum* 13.2 (2021): 64–81.

Cosenza, Apoena Canuto, and Grabois, Igor. ‘Frações de Classe e Reservas
Estratégicas: Um paradigma da aliança anti-fascista’. *Revista Mouro*
11.14 (2020).

Dimitrov, Georgi. ‘The United Front Against Fascism and War: The fascist
offensive and the tasks of the Communist International in the fight for
the unity of the working class against fascism’. New York: Workers
Library Publishers, 1935.

‘Um dia após Bolsonaro atacar urnas, embaixada dos EUA diz que eleições
no Brasil são 'modelo' para o mundo’, *G1*, 19 July 2022. in:
https://g1.globo.com/politica/noticia/2022/07/19/um-dia-apos-bolsonaro-atacar-urnas-embaixada-dos-eua-diz-que-eleicoes-no-brasil-sao-modelo-para-o-mundo.ghtml

Hickey, Sean. T*he Vichy regime and its National Revolution in the
political writings of Robert Brasillach, Marcel Déat, Jacques Doriot,
and Pierre Drieu La Rochelle*. Master Thesis, McGill University, 1991.

Hilferding, Rudolf. *Das Finanzkapital, eine Studie über die jüngste
Entwicklung des Kapitalismus*. Wiener Volksbuchandlung, 1910.

Jair M. Bolsonaro, @jairbolsonaro, https://twitter.com/jairbolsonaro.

Lanning, Robert. ‘Irrationalism: The foundation of hate
propaganda’, *Journal of Hate Studies* 10 (2011): 49–71 .

\_\_\_\_\_\_ .‘The Masses and Pro-fascist Propaganda’. *In the hotel
abyss: an Hegelian-Marxist critique of Adorno*. Brill, 2014, pp.120–150.

‘Áudio revela coronel Elcio Franco em trama golpista’, *CNN Brasil*, 8
May 2023.

Mussolini, “Speech at the Parlament, 3, January, 1925”, in MUSSOLINI, My
Autobiography. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1928. P. 23

Mussolini, Benito and Cope, E. *The doctrine of fascism*. Vallecchi,
1935.

Payne, Stanley G. *A history of fascism, 1914–1945*. Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press, 1996.

Reis, Claudio. ‘O intelectual orgânico do bolsonarismo e o caso da
pandemia’, *Revista Enfil* 12 (2020): 76–95.

Rios, Alan. ‘Golpistas tinham técnica de guerrilha e eram financiados,
diz coronel à CPI’. *Metrópole*, 16 March 2023. in:
https://www.metropoles.com/distrito-federal/golpistas-tinham-tecnica-de-guerrilha-e-eram-financiados-diz-coronel

Santos, Nina, Chagas, Viktor, Marinho, Juliana. ‘De onde vem a
informação que circula em grupos bolsonaristas no WhatsApp’.* Intexto*
53 (2022): 123603–123603.

Sassine, Vinicius and Mattoso, Camila. ‘PF encontra na casa de
ex-ministro minuta para Bolsonaro mudar resultado da eleição’, *Folha de
São Paulo*, 12 February 2023.

Scigliano, Robert G. ‘Political parties in South Vietnam under the
Republic’,* Pacific Affairs* 33 (4, 1960): 327–346.

Silva, Cris Guimarães Cirino da. *O bolsonarismo da esfera pública: uma
análise Foucaultiana sobre os conceitos de pós-verdade, fake news e
discurso de ódio presentes nas falas de Bolsonaro.* Master dissertation,
UFA, 2020.

Teles, Levy. ‘Bolsonaristas operam supergrupos nas redes e cobram
soltura de presos’, *Terra*, 21 February 2023. in:
https://www.terra.com.br/noticias/brasil/politica/bolsonaristas-operam-supergrupos-nas-redes-e-cobram-soltura-de-presos,2a64192551f7acce2efe0ff7c929ef6cvc3kwl6g.html

Vianna, José and Alberti, James. ‘Bolsonarista preso por tentar explodir
caminhão-tanque diz que recebeu bomba no acampamento do QG do Exército,
em Brasília’, *G1*, 19 January 2023. in:
https://g1.globo.com/df/distrito-federal/noticia/2023/01/19/bolsonarista-preso-por-tentar-explodir-caminhao-tanque-diz-que-recebeu-bomba-no-acampamento-do-qg-do-exercito-em-brasilia.ghtml

[^1]: Apoena Canuto Cosenza holds a PhD in Economic History from
    Universidade de São Paulo - USP, and is currently a member of the
    Mario Schenberg Institute.

[^2]: The protesters camped in front of the army headquarters in
    > Brasília and in front of different barracks throughout the
    > country.

[^3]: The term *financial bourgeoisie* comes from Hilferding in 1910,
    > and was later used by Lenin in 1917. This is the group of
    > businessmen who work in finance. Finance, for them, was the union
    > between banking capital and industrial capital. That is, they are
    > bankers, large shareholders, partners in economic conglomerates,
    > among others. See Rudolf Hilferding *Das Finanzkapital, eine
    > Studie über die jüngste Entwicklung des Kapitalismus*. Wiener
    > Volksbuchandlung, 1910.

[^4]: Dimitrov, Georgi. ‘The United Front Against Fascism and War: The
    > fascist offensive and the tasks of the Communist International in
    > the fight for the unity of the working class against fascism’. New
    > York: Workers Library Publishers, 1935.

[^5]: *Class fraction* is a grouping that although it forms part of a
    > broader socioeconomic class has its own interests that can place
    > it in a different political field from the rest of its class.

[^6]: At Brazil, the term Militia (*Milícias*) has become a synonym of
    organized crime that is ruled by crooked members of state repression
    forces, that takes control over a territory.

[^7]: Apoena Canuto Cosenza and Igor Grabois, ‘Frações de Classe e
    Reservas Estratégicas: Um paradigma da aliança anti-fascista’.
    *Revista Mouro* 11 (14), 2020.

[^8]: Benito Mussolini and Giovanni Gentile, *The Doctrine of Fascism*.
    > Vallecchi, 1935.

[^9]: Silva, Cris Guimarães Cirino da. ‘O bolsonarismo da esfera
    > pública: uma análise Foucaultiana sobre os conceitos de
    > pós-verdade, fake news e discurso de ódio presentes nas falas de
    > Bolsonaro’. Masters dissertation, UFA, 2020.

[^10]: Stanley G. Payne,* A History of Fascism, 1914–1945*, Madison,
    > University of Wisconsin Press, 1996.

[^11]: José Vianna and James Alberti, ‘Bolsonarista preso por tentar
    > explodir caminhão-tanque diz que recebeu bomba no acampamento do
    > QG do Exército, em Brasília’, *Jornal G1*, 19 January 2023.

[^12]: Vinicius Sassine and Camila Mattoso, ‘PF encontra na casa de
    > ex-ministro minuta para Bolsonaro mudar resultado da eleição’,
    > *Folha de São Paulo*, 12 February 2023.

[^13]: ‘Áudio revela coronel Elcio Franco em trama golpista’, *CNN
    > Brasil*, 8 May 2023.

[^14]: Jair M. Bolsonaro, @jairbolsonaro,
    https://twitter.com/jairbolsonaro.

[^15]: We adopted as a category the concepts of ‘strategic cadres’ which
    are the general organizational and political leaders of the
    movement, and ‘tactical cadres’ which are the occasional
    organizational leaders of a given subgroup or given specific
    political action of a larger political movement.

[^16]: MUSSOLINI, “Speech at the Parlament, 3, January, 1925”, in
    MUSSOLINI, My Autobiography. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons,
    1928. P. 23

[^17]: Benito Mussolini and E. Cope, *The doctrine of fascism*.
    Vallecchi, 1935.

[^18]: Sean Hickey. The Vichy regime and its National Revolution in the
    > political writings of Robert Brasillach, Marcel Déat, Jacques
    > Doriot, and Pierre Drieu La Rochelle. Master Thesis, McGill
    > University, 1991.

[^19]: Robert G. Scigliano, ‘Political parties in South Vietnam under
    > the Republic’, *Pacific Affairs* 33.4 (1960): 327–346.

[^20]: Claudio Reis, ‘O intelectual orgânico do bolsonarismo e o caso da
    > pandemia’. *Revista Enfil* 12 (2020): 76–95.

[^21]: Gilberto Calil, ‘Olavo de Carvalho e a ascensão da
    > extrema-direita’,* Argumentum* 13.2 (2021): 64–81.

[^22]: Reis, ‘O intelectual orgânico do bolsonarismo e o caso da
    > pandemia’.

[^23]: ‘Um dia após Bolsonaro atacar urnas, embaixada dos EUA diz que
    > eleições no Brasil são 'modelo' para o mundo’, *Jornal* *G1*, 19
    > July 2022.

[^24]: Robert Lanning, ‘Irrationalism: The foundation of hate
    > propaganda’, *Journal of Hate Studies.* 10, 2011, p. 49. See also,
    > Robert Lanning, ‘The Masses and Pro-fascist Propaganda’. In: *‘The
    > Masses and Pro-fascist Propaganda’. In the hotel abyss: an
    > Hegelian-Marxist critique of Adorno.* Brill*,* 2014*,* pp.120–150.

[^25]: It is important to emphasize that what Bolsonarism calls the left
    is not exactly what political science would call the left. In fact,
    there is little methodological rigor in the classification of what
    is or is not left by Jair Bolsonaro's supporters.

[^26]: Levy Teles, ‘Bolsonaristas operam supergrupos nas redes e cobram
    > soltura de presos’, *Terra*, 21 February 2023.

[^27]: Nina Santos, Viktor Chagas and Juliana Marinho, ‘De onde vem a
    > informação que circula em grupos bolsonaristas no
    > WhatsApp’,* Intexto* 53 (2022): 123603–123603.

[^28]: The terms collected were ‘:Alexandre de Moraes’, ‘Bolsonaro
    Mito’, ‘Dia 7 manifestação’, ‘Fecha STF’, ‘Festa da Selma’, ‘Fraude
    Eleição’, ‘Intervenção Militar’, ‘Lula Ladrão’, ‘Nuremberg’,
    ‘Revolução Verde Amarelo’, ‘Viva Bolsonaro’.

[^29]: This term is used by Brazilian influencers to describe the amount
    of times an idea or a post generated some kind of registered
    engagement other than reactions such as ‘likes’.

[^30]: ‘Festa da Selma’ is a term that has a double reference. It is a
    reference to the city of Selma, in the state of Alabama in the
    United States, the scene of the massacre of a manifestation of the
    black movement known as ‘Bloody Sunday’. It is also a reference to
    the term ‘Selva’, used as a greeting by the Brazilian army.

[^31]: Alan Rios. ‘Golpistas tinham técnica de guerrilha e eram
    > financiados, diz coronel à CPI’. *Jornal Metrópole*, 16 March
    > 2023.
