---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Experience and Barbarism in Brasilia: a Savage Journey to Understand the Heart of Brazilian Conservative Rioters

### Eduardo Ruedell[^1]

If you were in Brazil or checked the social media profile of Brazilians
over the past four years, you would probably hear or read that future
historians will find it difficult to explain to people what happened
during Jair Bolsonaro's government (2019-2022). For me, that phrase has
always been rich in meaning but poor in signification. In less semiotic
terms, I perceived its abstract dimensions and the ideas it conveyed,
but its materiality always seemed hard to grasp. At least until I
witnessed the events of Sunday, January 8, 2023, which forced me to
perceive other nuances of what that sentence means and reassess my role
as a social scientist.

When I watched the first images of the Planalto Riots on television that
Sunday afternoon, I realized that historians would indeed have
difficulties explaining what we had experienced over those years,
particularly on that day. However the difficulty of this task would not
be related only to psychological effects.

The images I saw that Sunday and in the following days and weeks left me
intellectually immobilized. I couldn't find anything that would help me
understand the events I witnessed in theoretical frameworks. At that
time, I was finishing a dissertation about a French anti-vax movement
that I had observed and analyzed from emergence to dusk,[^2] and yet I
felt intellectually impotent to face what was happening in my own
country. But it was precisely the perception that I was experiencing
those events that made me realize that one of the possible ways to
understand them had been paved 80 years ago by Walter Benjamin.[^3]

This (short) essay is a personal account of the savage journey in trying
to understand the Planalto Riots and the motivation of the Brazilian
conservative rioters. I am not a historian, and I do not intend to be
one even in my wildest dreams. My discussion on Walter Benjamin’s
understanding of History, experience, and barbarism is a humble attempt
to assess this moment in Brazilian history.

## ‘And suddenly there was a terrible roar all around us’[^4]

I do not remember the exact time of the first live broadcast of the
riots that I watched on TV. I remember being at my mother-in-law's house
and walking past the TV room, on my way to the kitchen, to get another
piece of pie. It was windy, and the temperature was almost 40 degrees
Celsius. On my way back to my fiancée's bedroom, I felt goosebumps when
I heard the opening tunes of the breaking news jingle of Brazil’s main
television channels. That alarming song had already anticipated the
announcement of so many tragedies before, that listening to it always
puts me on the edge.

Moved by curiosity, I stopped in front of the television set, and when I
saw what it was about, I sat glued to the screen next to my
mother-in-law for the next few hours. At that time, in the early
afternoon, the rioters had just broken the last barrier set up by the
police, which had failed to prevent them from reaching Praça dos Três
Poderes.[^5] I remember watching a green-and-yellow-clad mob running
towards the National Congress Palace at the center of the square and
expecting them to eventually begin to disperse.

It was then that things got weird. The rioters did not seem to face much
resistance from the local police, and when they reached the government
buildings they began to smash glass doors, windows, and walls. Rally
cries gave way to shouting and roaring amid whistling and drumming –
sounds that were picked up by the television microphones – and were
immediately replaced by the sounds of breaking and smashing glass. We
now know that military and police officers helped the rioters first
enter the buildings and then escape.

The images and the sounds from the television shocked me but did not
surprise me. The Planalto riots seemed like just one more attempt to
shake Brazil's young democracy in the last six decades.[^6] Shortly
after the results of the second round of the presidential election were
announced on the evening of October 30th, 2022, bolsonarist militants
began gathering in front of military headquarters across Brazil to
protest election results. Over time, these gatherings turned into
organized camps, constantly supplied with resources provided by powerful
Bolsonaro supporters. It can be said that the events of January 8th
began in the camp set up in front of the army headquarters in Brasilia.
The slogans of the hundreds of people who marched on Brazil's capital
city on that Sunday were the same as those heard in the camps since
months before and in demonstrations since at least 2016:[^7] there were
calls for a military coup, for the return of the military dictatorship,
for the reinstatement of AI-5,[^8] for the imprisonment of Supreme Court
judges, and for the closure of the National Congress.

On Twitter, many of my friends said they were surprised to see people
from different generations among rioters and that they could not tell
whether the majority was made up of elderly or young people. My late
grandfather, who was part of the *Legality Struggle*[^9] against the
military coup in 1964, once told me that his generation had almost no
experience dealing with democracy and that the foundations he and his
contemporaries had built would have to be strengthened in the future. My
parents' generation tried to build their monuments on these fragile
foundations, and even my generation was not afraid to add another level
- all without having yet mastered the art of democracy building.

But what would Benjamin say? Three possibilities came to mind, but I do
not regard any of them as definitive. The first is that the rioters
wanted to destroy what we had been building since the end of the
military dictatorship in the mid-1980s to live among the ruins of a
military past they glorify. On the other hand, they could also destroy
this monument, which is still under construction, to rebuild the one
they evoke. However, as I write this text, another scenario seems more
appropriate: they tried to take advantage of their kairos, the opportune
moment.

When I think about the rioters, I imagine them as subjects of an
attempted coup, but these people saw themselves at that moment as actors
in a revolution, trying to take advantage of the opportune moment to
make the changes that would lead to their vision of a better future. For
them, the ruins of the past from two decades of dictatorship represented
Brazil's salvation from communism, and these ruins were buried by the
fragile democratic foundations that my grandfather talked about, and
which therefore had to be removed – symbolically by destroying the
government palaces, and de facto by a coup. So, yes, there was an
intention to rebuild a past from its ruins, but the moment in which they
would do so would be crucial. To better understand how and perhaps even
why this happened, I think it is crucial to interrupt my story to
finally bring Benjamin closer to the fire.

The idea of a ruined past, of kairos, and even the danger of glorifying
the past are things I learned from Benjamin and are directly related to
his complex meditations on History.[^10] For the German philosopher,
History cannot be understood as something progressive and linear, in
which the future is guaranteed, and it is enough to move on. And if the
future is not given, the past is not over either: it is in ruins,
recognizable in the present. But this doesn’t make it something broken –
the past possesses a messianic force that can manifest itself in each
new generation, and that awakens hope and an expectation of happiness
based on this idea of the past or on looking at it.

However, this does not mean that the past should be looked at with
nostalgia. Rather, it should be re-signified in our instances of
recognition, so that the present can be the kairos or the opportune
moment to make the changes that still need to be made in the present. In
other words, the teleological idea of a given future must be broken, so
that it can be built from the now.

However, making history is not easy. For Benjamin, this is only possible
if we first manage to secure the material conditions for our survival
(which in a liberal democracy is linked to exploitation in class
conflicts) and when we claim the spiritual aspects (i.e. culture,
knowledge, and even art).[^11] The reason why this is so important for
Benjamin is that spiritual elements are constructed out of experience
and are devices of re-signification that also refer back to that past in
ruins. The past shines through in the present and if we do not catch its
brief sparkle, the truth about it will escape us. How can we catch this
truth? How can we make it easier to grasp? Through storytelling.[^12]

According to Benjamin, experience is made up of complex relationships
established between subjects, time, space, history, and memory. It is
made up of a subjective dimension and a practical dimension that relate
to an individual experience dimension and to the subject's relationship
with the world, or the collective dimension. Thus, experience, in
addition to being singular, cannot be contained in a limiting concept
that defines it as an accumulation of information or knowledge. And for
it to be properly transmitted (or narrated) there must be a shared
context between those who speak and those who listen.[^13]

Benjamin saw the end of the experience as the consequence of traditional
storytelling’s failure, which at the time he wrote had been replaced by
other more ephemeral forms of narrative that did not inspire deep
reflection, such as the novel and the newspaper.[^14] What we have
noticed in the last decade all over the world is that collective
experience has suddenly been replaced only by its individual dimension
due to a deepening of the ephemerality, individuality, and personalism
of new narrative forms, mainly through the use of social media and
instant messaging apps, which are highly individualized. Social media
have profoundly changed the way we consume information – including
journalistic information – and how we relate to other people, and as a
result, it drastically affects our worldview. We now live under the
logic of novelty, where the ephemeral nature of information that reaches
us is highly valued.

A good example is the information feeds in Telegram and WhatsApp that
mobilized groups of Bolsonaro supporters for the Planalto Riots.
Immediately following election results, high volumes of fake news
circulated daily in these groups, many informing that military
intervention would occur ‘within 72 hours’, changing the course of the
country's political situation to Bolsonaro’s favor. However, at the end
of the first 72 hours, nothing happened, and a new message was sent and
replicated thousands of times rumoring that, ‘now yes!’, all they had to
do was resist for another 72 hours, and so forth. There is no need to
state the obvious – no one in those Telegram and WhatsApp groups was
questioning the origin of these messages, who produced them, and what
meanings they triggered throughout Brazil. It was enough that
Bolsonaro's supporters believed in them and stayed calm for another
three days at a time. And for many of them, these 72 hours are not yet
over.

None of this is surprising. The use of fake news as a communication
strategy is not exactly unique to the Brazilian political scene, but the
Bolsonaristas seem to have mastered this practice with the creation of
bot farms and the bombardment of alarmist information since before the
presidential elections that brought Bolsonaro to power in 2018. One of
the most notorious and bizarre cases was the so-called cock-pacifier
memes, in which a video of a Bolsonaro supporter denounced the alleged
distribution of penis-shaped feeding bottles in daycare centers across
Brazil by the Workers' Party (PT), Bolsonaro's main opposition party.
The video had millions of views, and thousands of shares with people
showing they believed in the video content. This kind of action and
reaction based on fake news is one of the main engines of Bolsonarismo,
and what lies behind the looping 72-hour wait. This corroborates
Benjamin's idea that people have indeed become less enlightened.[^15]
This is not a personal judgment but an observation that people's sense
of their place in the world is increasingly diffuse. The small material
progress that societies have made (and in very heterogeneous ways) can
sometimes give the illusion that ‘we have progressed’ and that things
are ‘better’.

I remember attending a social history class some years ago when the
professor raised the question of people's lack of enlightenment in
Benjamin’s view and gave the following example: Many Brazilian families
have been able to acquire flat-screen televisions in recent years, but
who in the family uses this television to watch films, and who is at the
same time in the kitchen preparing dinner and doing the dishes? Does the
person sitting in front of the new TV set think that his family has
progressed socially? Probably yes. The same lack of enlightenment about
the patriarchal structures in family structures can be seen in the
political positions of those involved in the attempted coup of January
8.

During the Planalto Riots, one of the buildings most damaged by the
vandalism of the rioters was the Federal Supreme Court Palace,
especially the office of Federal Judge Alexandre de Moraes. The actions
of the Supreme Court, and in particular Judge Alexandre de Moraes – and
his judicial actions to combat fake news, to ensure respect for the
results of the 2022 elections, to defend the integrity of government
institutions, as well as the opening of investigations against
Bolsonaro, his family and supporters – motivated the destruction of the
Federal Court's headquarters, the vandalization of national symbols, and
even the recording of videos of grotesque scenes with people defecating
on Morae’s’ office desk.

But why destroy and attack the Supreme Court Palace itself? Because the
Supreme Court and its judges are symbolized by the physical structure of
its headquarters, it is a monument that evokes, in general terms, a
recent past of democracy and the more recent fight against Bolsonaro’s
electoral crimes during the 2022 elections. According to Benjamin,
monuments are erected with the intention of illuminating a past and are
linked to historical, cultural, social, and even economic relations that
are established and consolidated so they can be passed on to the next
generations.[^16] But let us not deceive ourselves: the transmission of
a monument, as Benjamin has shown us, always involves the transmission
of barbarism. And barbarism is a condition resulting from the end of a
connection that existed between humanity, its inner essence, and nature.
Barbarism is not an organic dimension of societies and can be understood
much more as a stage reached by modern societies marked by violence and
oppression, which relates to how these societies organize themselves as
an effect of their economic relations. For Benjamin, barbarism is a real
threat to humanity that can only be fought against through social
revolutions and the vindication of spiritual elements.

How does all this relate to what happened in Brasilia on January 8th?
The answer is not simple, but here is my attempt.

## ‘There was madness in any direction, at any hour’[^17]

The time it took me to write this text was the same time it took the
rioters to invade, ravage and loot the buildings of the Brazilian
Federal Government. It all happened very quickly, and at the same time,
it never seemed to come to an end. It was the most sophisticated
manifestation of barbarism I had ever seen. The violence and symbolic
repression of this attempted coup can be understood as the result of
breaking those bolsonaristas’ connection with what was most human in its
essence.

In Experience and Poverty,[^18] following the discussion of the
impoverishment of experience mentioned above, Benjamin affirms that this
impoverishment, when linked to the overvaluation of technology, leads to
galvanization, a phenomenon that drives people away from experience.
Galvanization creates a ‘layer’ over people that blinds them to reality,
creating a new barbarism. Benjamin writes that this new barbarism
prevents galvanized people from having access to knowledge, so they are
only moved by what is reproduced by the media, mass media in Benjamin's
time, and digital media today.

I see these rioters as ‘galvanized people’, driven to barbarism by a
dangerous combination of glorification of the past, an extreme
conservatism that has been latent for years, and an abundance of fake
news. I cannot verify that all of them were supporters of the military
dictatorship when they lived during those years. Some of them could even
have been part of opposition movements at the time, but they lost their
sense of reality because of these mediations promoted by fake news. The
bombardment of false information and the value of the ephemeral, which
prevents them from critical thinking, when combined with the
idealization of false progress, drives them away from the truth and from
their own experience. The ruins of the past have disappeared, the truth
shone for a moment but was not perceived.

On the other hand, it is important for us to never forget that in their
view we are wrong since we don’t perceive the truth as they do. It does
not matter that there was never a communist threat in Brazil, that what
happened in Brasilia on January 8 was a tentative coup d'état, or that
the majority of the population voted for Lula da Silva in a democratic
movement. Those rioters, and hundreds of thousands of other people,
truly believe that they were seizing the kairos.

It is necessary that we vindicate spiritual elements in a process in
which social scientists play a very important role. But for some time
now there seems to have been an estrangement between society and social
scientists, which is our own barbarism, affecting us by making us lose
the ability to locate ourselves in the world in which we live. Simply
accepting that we are enlightened by knowledge, without recognizing our
role as agents of social transformation, leads us to galvanize ourselves
in our own way. And there is nothing more academic than a galvanized
scientist, oblivious to her/his surroundings. The only way to resist is
to recognize ourselves and reclaim our role in our societies, not only
as scientists but also as subjects.

And let us not forget that the ruins of that past are already glistening
in our present. Indeed, it will not be easy for historians to explain
what happened in Brasilia on January 8, 2023. Notwithstanding, we must
catch this truth before it escapes us. It is necessary to break with
individualism so that we can reconstruct experience from its collective
dimension, and then think of new ways of building narratives. We cannot
deny modernity, but we can ‘brush history against its grain’.[^19]

\*\*\*

It was about 8 PM when I got up from the sofa when my fiancée came
through the front door Five hours had already passed, and I remember
that my mother-in-law had been in the same position all the time:
sitting on a chair with her elbows on her knees and hands covering her
mouth, stunned – a position that she interrupted only occasionally to
smoke a cigarette to relieve her anxiety from seeing the city that had
welcomed her in her youth destroyed by the rioters. I took a bite of the
pie that was left on my plate that afternoon. It was hard to digest.

## Bibliography

Benjamin, Walter. ‘The Storyteller: Observations on the Works of Nikolai
Leskov’, in Howard Eiland and Michael W. Jennings (eds) *Walter
Benjamin: Selected Writings Volume 3: 1935 - 1938*, Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 2002, pp. 143-166.

––––––. ‘On the Concept of History’, in Howard Eiland and Michael W.
Jennings (eds.), *Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings Volume 4: 1938 -
1940*, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2003, pp. 389-400.

––––––. ‘Experience and Poverty’, *Atlas of Places*, January 2018,
https://www.atlasofplaces.com/essays/experience-and-poverty/.

Ruedell, Eduardo, *Aux armes, antivax! Uma análise da estrutura
comunicacional do coletivo Lyon Pour La Liberté*, MA diss., Graduate
Program in Media Communication, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria,
Santa Maria/Brazil, 2023.

Thompson, Hunter, *Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas: A Savage Journey to
the Heart of the American Dream*, New York: Vintage, 1998.

[^1]: Doctoral student and MA in Media Communication at Universidade
    Federal de Santa Maria, Brazil. E-mail:
    eduardo.ruedell@acad.ufsm.br.

[^2]: Eduardo Ruedell, *Aux armes, ativax! Uma análise da estrutura
    comunicacional do coletivo Lyon Pour La Liberté*, MA diss., Graduate
    Program in Media Communication, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria,
    Santa Maria/Brazil, 2023.

[^3]: Walter Benjamin, ‘On the Concept of History’, in Howard Eiland and
    Michael W. Jennings (eds.), Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings
    Volume 4: 1938 - 1940, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2003.

[^4]: Hunter Thompson, *Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas: A Savage Journey
    to the Heart of the American Dream*, 1998, p. 4.

[^5]: *Praça dos Três Poderes* is a public plaza in Brasilia that
    concentrates the headquarters of the three branches of the Brazilian
    government: the Palácio do Planalto (headquarters of the executive
    branch), the National Congress Palace (headquarters of the
    legislative branch) and the Supreme Court Palace (headquarters of
    the judicial branch).

[^6]: Throughout Brazil's existence as a nation-state, since the
    Proclamation of Independence from Portugal in 1822, the country has
    suffered at least nine coups d'état, most of them perpetrated by the
    military. The most recent, in 1964, resulted in a military
    dictatorship that would last for 21 years, ending only in 1985, when
    a process known as "Redemocratization" began. Redemocratization
    would culminate in 1988 with the promulgation of a new federal
    constitution that is still in effect, marking the beginning of what
    is often considered the country's first truly democratic period.

[^7]: In 2016, the then-president of Brazil, Dilma Roussef (PT -
    Workers' Party), was removed from office following a parliamentary
    coup supported by her then-vice president. Public demonstrations
    against President Dilma had been observed since 2013, when a wave of
    protests broke out across the country, intensifying with the 2014
    presidential elections. Throughout 2016, especially during the
    period when the process of impeaching Rousseff was being articulated
    in Congress, orders of protesters wearing the jerseys of the
    Brazilian national soccer team took to the streets of Brazil's major
    cities, using the slogan ‘first we'll remove PT, and then we take
    out the rest’.

[^8]: AI-5 was a decree promulgated by General Costa e Silva in 1968
    that removed from their ranks and positions the politicians who
    opposed his government and established a system of direct federal
    intervention in the states and municipalities.

[^9]: This term refers to military personnel, mainly from the state of
    Rio Grande do Sul, who opposed the 1964 military coup that overthrew
    the then president, João Goulart (1961-1964).

[^10]: Walter Benjamin, ‘On the Concept of History’, 2003.

[^11]: Walter Benjamin, ‘On the Concept of History’, 2003.

[^12]: Walter Benjamin, ‘Experience and Poverty’, Atlas of Places,
    January 2018,
    https://www.atlasofplaces.com/essays/experience-and-poverty/.

[^13]: Walter Benjamin, ‘On the Concept of History’, 2003.

[^14]: Walter Benjamin,‘The Storyteller: Observations on the Works of
    Nikolai Leskov’, in Howard Eiland and Michael W. Jennings (eds)
    *Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings Volume 3: 1935 - 1938*,
    Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2002.

[^15]: Walter Benjamin, ‘On the Concept of History’, 2003.

[^16]: Ibid.

[^17]: Thompson, 1998, p. 31.

[^18]: Benjamin, ‘Experience and Poverty’, 2018.

[^19]: Benjamin, ‘On the Concept of History’, 2003.
