---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# The Stories of the Victims: The Planalto Riots from the Perspective of Terrorized Art

### Oscar Svanelid[^1]

‘The old world is dying. The new world is emerging slowly. And in this
chiaroscuro, monsters are born.’ – Antonio Gramsci[^2]

The political ideology of Bolsonarismo revealed its true monstrous face
at the attempted coup of January 8^th^ in 2023, known as the Planalto
Riots. This movement which earlier boasted about representing the
‘upstanding citizen’,[^3] now exposed itself as an unruly gang of
neo-fascists defecating and urinating on the floor in a self-deprecating
attack on the most prominent democratic institutions in Brazil. Their
violent attack on the world-famous modernist buildings which Oscar
Niemeyer drew in the 1950s showed them to be as ignorant of the values
of democracy and national cultural heritage as many other neofascist
movements across the globe. What they really wanted was to spread terror
that, to their twisted minds, could restore a nightmarish world of
authoritarian and theocratic order.[^4]

The Planalto Riots occurred on a Sunday when the government buildings
were mostly empty, so the rioters mainly targeted the architectural
environment, artworks, and design objects housed inside. The media
quickly reported on the staggering costs of repairing the damaged
objects. However, I am wary of accepting the economic narrative at face
value. Instead, I propose viewing the Planalto Riots from the
perspective of the damaged objects themselves. Or, at the very least,
presenting them as actors ‘on the historical stage \[who\] parallels and
participates in the stories we tell ourselves’.[^5] I suggest this
approach as I feel that after this national trauma, everyone was
speaking except for the victims themselves. While it may seem naive to
empathize with a broken table, a kidnapped sculpture, or a wounded
painting, it feels unfair not to include their perspective in the
history of the Planalto Riots.

## The Planalto Riot as Anti-Modernist Iconoclasm

The Planalto Riots were hardly the first time aesthetic objects of great
symbolic and economic value were vandalized and destroyed. Just think
about the revolt against imperialist sculptures and other iconic objects
that happened during the Paris Commune in 1871. Today there have been
similar, although often less mass-oriented, events from politically
opposed movements such as Black Lives Matter activists destroying
sculptures of slave traders and white supremacists burning the Quran.
This shows that contemporary political ideologies continue to live out
the desire to destroy the symbolic order of the enemy, known as
iconoclasm.[^6] When speaking about the Planalto Riots, we should also
not forget that one of the many nicknames of the former president of
Brazil, Jair Bolsonaro, is ‘the enemy of modernity’. Therefore, it
hardly came as a surprise when his followers attacked the P*raça dos
Três Poderes* (The Three Powers Square), which the urban planner Lúcio
Costa designed together with Niemeyer in the late 1950s as the core of
the modern aesthetic and political order that Brasilia was meant to
represent.

Costa's famous *Plano Piloto* (Pilot Plan) for Brasilia in 1957 was
chosen by the jury as the purest representation of a new,
post-historical beginning for Brazil.[^7] While this *tabula rasa* could
never actually function as a founding myth for the country, it certainly
encapsulated what in the 1950s was understood as the modernized flight
towards an (impossible) modern utopia. This idea did not simply arrive
in a stroke of genius, as Costa liked to argue, but was deeply rooted in
a colonial hallucination of occupying an empty land that belonged to
Indigenous peoples.[^8] Moreover, the so-called 'egalitarian order' that
Costa envisaged for Brasilia exacerbated the very socioeconomic and
racial divisions it aimed to surpass.[^9]

The worst tragedy of Brasilia, however, occurred after the military coup
in 1964, when this modernist city, which originally hinted at a
classless society, was transformed into a symbol of authoritarianism.
Yet, it is important to note that Brasilia should not be viewed solely
as a modernity icon, but rather as a contested site of an ongoing
iconoclastic struggle. This history was repeated in the recent
neofascist spectacle in 2023. The Planalto Riots, due to a lack of
military assistance, were more farcical than historical fascism with
tanks and armies at its disposal. However, the objects targeted in the
attack must have experienced this farce as a terrifying event.

## Kubitschek’s Table

![](media/image1.png){width="6.299305555555556in" height="2.875in"}

Figure 1: The work table designed by Oscar Niemeyer and used by the
Brazilian president Juscelino Kubitschek in the 1960s.

The object that I sympathize with the most is a wooden table that was
used as a barricade by *Bolsonaristas* during the riots at the
Presidential Palace.[^10] This table was designed by Brazilian architect
Oscar Niemeyer and was made from Jacaranda wood, which was very popular
in Brazilian furniture design at the time. The table could also be
adjusted to change its size, making it an iconic example of modern
design. During its early years, the table was used by Juscelino
Kubitschek (JK) in his office as a material support for his vision of a
modernized Brazil. However, over time, the table's role changed. In
1964, it witnessed the military coup that overthrew the democratic
political system, which its founding fathers had put their faith
in.[^11] After this event, the table was used by generals who wrote the
documents that enabled some of the worst human rights abuses in modern
Brazilian history on its polished wooden surface.[^12] Niemeyer’s table
at least cannot complain that its life has been boring.

Fortunately, in the 1970s, the table was granted the elevated status of
a historical object. This enabled its early retirement to the dark
chambers of the presidential collection, where it could expect a long,
quiet life without much happening. Although it lost its practical use,
it was compensated with exponential growth in economic and symbolic
value. Unlike human beings, design objects age beautifully and acquire
an aura. The table entered the sublime space of the presidential
collection with the expectation of delicate care and expertise, which
less fortunate objects can only dream of receiving.

After decades of retirement, Niemeyer’s presidential table was
unexpectedly brought back into use. One can only imagine how it must
have felt to be reduced once again to a mere object. To make matters
worse, this happened during the government of interim president Michel
Temer (2016-2018), when the table was placed in the office of the
Minister of the President's General Secretariat, Moreira Franco.[^13]
Franco tweeted that the table, which had become a symbol of the
prosperous modern era for him, would inspire him to ‘put Brazil back on
track’.[^14]

While it is true that designed objects can play a role in shaping our
human world, some problems are too complex for a wooden table to solve.
Instead of addressing the chaos in Brazilian politics, Temer’s
government is widely criticized for exacerbating the country's financial
and social problems with its neoliberal economic policies. Today, the
table is 60 years old and can once again look forward to retirement. Due
to the damages caused during the Planalto Riots, this state appears to
be perpetual. This leaves much time to reflect on its dramatic life
story, which must be rather unique, at least for a table.

## Lady Justice Taken Hostage

![](media/image2.png){width="2.8229166666666665in"
height="3.2131944444444445in"}

Figure 2: Alfredo Ceschiatti, *A Justiça*, 1961, granite, 3,3 x 1,48 m.

During the Planalto riots, valuable furniture wasn't the only thing that
was targeted. Several famous paintings and sculptures were also
destroyed. One of these was Alfredo Ceschiatti's three-meter-high
granite sculpture, *A Justiça* (The Justice), from 1961, commissioned
for a site outside the Supreme Court building. The sculpture was
inspired by the allegoric image of Lady Justice, who is depicted as
sitting down with a blindfold and a sword solemnly placed on her lap.
However, what sets Ceschiatti's sculpture apart from other
representations of this figure is that Justice lacks her notorious
scale.

Legal theorist Rafael Lazzarotto Simioni suggests that *A Justiça* has
not lost her scale by accident but has willingly given it away. This is
to indicate that the scale has become the property of every citizen who,
as subjects of the law, are responsible for balancing their deeds and
desires.[^15] People can no longer view Lady Justice as the allegorical
embodiment of divine law; they are now expected to look inward and
develop a sense of right and wrong themselves. This may explain why *A
Justiça* is not standing up, waving her sword, as in many other
sculptural representations. Instead, she appears as an embodiment of
modernity, where self-discipline and control are viewed as more
effective means of governing the population than cutting the throats of
sinners. In this way, Ceschiatti's sculpture can also be viewed as an
allegory for Brasilia, which aimed to design an urban environment where
people would be forced to adopt the disciplinary order needed to acquire
the peaceful habits of domesticated social life.

Yet, Ceschiatti's *A Justiça* is of monumental size, suggesting that it
is not intended to be viewed as equal to humans. Instead, the figure
appears to have originated from the radiance of the spiritual world of
ideas. This implies that Lady Justice never fully trusted the Brazilian
people with her scale. It is more reasonable to assume that she gave her
scale as a symbolic gift to the ministers of the Supreme Federal Court
building, under the condition that they use it wisely. In this context,
the modern aspect of Ceschiatti's sculpture should thus be found in the
trust that developed between Lady Justice and the judiciary institution
in the early 1960s.

While Lady Justice suffered no severe physical damage during the
Planalto Riots, the Bolsonaristas exerted psychological violence against
her. They painted the phrase ‘Perdeu, Mané’ (‘You lost, man’) in
blood-red color on her naked body and, even worse, hung a Brazilian flag
around her neck. The phrase was meant as an act of revenge against
Federal Judge Luís Roberto Barroso, a member of the Supreme Court, who
had used the same expression when addressing a Bolsonaro supporter
refusing the results of the democratic presidential election in 2022. We
can also see that the rioters directed this phrase at Lady Justice, who
was threatened with serving a military regime once again, which mocked
her moral standards of faithfulness to the Brazilian constitution.

It may thus be suggested that the Bolsonaristas pointed out a flaw in
Ceschiatti's *Lady Justice* sculpture. By giving away her scales to the
Supreme Federal Court, she lost her ability to make independent
judgments. This has put her in a position of dependence where she is
unable to refuse even the most outrageous commands. Philosopher Giorgio
Agamben reminds us that Lady Justice sometimes loses her mind, which is
an essential aspect of her being as a historical figure.[^16] We can
only imagine the traumatic memories from the basements of the military
regime, where she appeared as a ghostly presence, brought back by the
rioters when they held her hostage. At the same time, the Bolsonaristas
highlighted that Lady Justice has not always been as innocent as she
likes to pretend.

This opens the riddle of why Lady Justice is portrayed as blindfolded.
The most commonly accepted explanation is that the blindfold is meant to
ensure impartiality in her verdicts, as she cannot base her decisions on
appearance or be swayed by sparkling gifts.[^17] Some may also argue
that the blindfold rather serves as a veil of ignorance that humans have
imposed on Lady Justice to protect ourselves from her piercing
gaze.[^18] However, historian Adriano Prosperi suggests that the leftist
poet Edgar Lee Masters offers the most compelling explanation for Lady
Justice's blindfold. Masters wrote that the blindfold is actually a
bandage covering Lady Justice's eyes, which she had clawed out in a
moment of madness. It thus appears that Ceschiatti is attempting to
deceive us by using the image of a youthful body, but if we were to
uncover her eyes, we might see the turmoil of a spirit in decline.[^19]
Therefore, it is important to condemn and penalize any form of
psychological abuse against Lady Justice. In these times, it is crucial
to ensure that Lady Justice is treated with the utmost care.

## The Unknown Horizon of Di Cavalcanti’s Women

![](media/image3.png){width="4.302083333333333in"
height="3.8979166666666667in"}

Figure 3: Emiliano Di Cavalcanti, *Untitled*, 1962, Oil on canvas, 1,20
x 3,43 m.

The act of vandalism that received the most attention in the Planalto
Riots targeted a famous painting by Brazilian painter Emiliano Di
Cavalcanti which circulated in the media with the derogatory title *As
mulatas* (The Mulattas) from 1962.[^20] Di Cavalcanti’s painting was
wounded with several holes, which were likely caused by sharp
cobblestones thrown by rioters. These cuts draw attention to the
misogynistic aspect of neofascist movements, to which Bolsonaro
repeatedly alluded. Furthermore, they can be seen as indicative of the
alarming rates of femicide in Brazil, where black women are in the
majority. Femicide and other forms of male violence against women have
been a persistent issue in Brazilian society. However, the situation
worsened under Bolsonaro's government. On one hand, the government made
it easier for the population to access firearms. On the other hand, it
opposed the so-called gender ideology, further contributing to the
problem.[^21]

Although Di Cavalcanti’s painting has been hanging in the Presidential
Palace for several decades, it wasn't originally commissioned for that
location. It was first displayed in the dining room of a cruiser named
after Princess Leopoldina of Brazil.[^22] The painting depicts a
picturesque tropical setting with a group of women of color engaged in
their daily activities. One is cleaning fish while the others are
playing guitar and sitting quietly around a table. In the background, a
harbor can be seen where a fisherman is unloading the day's catch. In
recent years, there has been valid criticism of Di Cavalcanti's
portrayal of black women in his paintings as sexualized objects of male
desire, particularly those referred to as *mulatas*.[^23] What stands
out in this painting is also the women's absent gazes, which adds a
sense of unease to the scene. It feels as if these women are waiting for
something terrible to happen.

In the painting, the woman in the foreground is gazing at a distant
horizon, and we are left wondering what she is looking at. We imagine
the sound of guitar music being played by a woman next to her, but it
doesn't seem to lift her spirits. The two women appear to be in each
other's company, but not communicating through speech or eye contact.
They seem to share an unspoken bond that extends beyond words. Perhaps
it has something to do with their shared focus on a faraway space, which
we can only assume is a musical space. This allows them to elude the
gaze that tries to capture them.

The women in Di Cavalcanti's painting could thus seem to be avoiding the
guests who are dining on the luxurious cruiser where the painting was
first installed. Although the upper-class viewers were staring at them,
the painter had the decency to hide their inner selves. When the
painting was later moved to the Presidential Palace, it gained a
political dimension. Now, the painting can be seen as a way to encourage
those in positions of governmental power to empathize with these women
from the past. However, the women remain as mysterious as ever, and it
seems they will never fully reveal their secrets. This type of canonical
painting has a long lifespan, and it will continue to be admired for
generations to come. So, even though the painting won't provide any
answers, the women in the painting are still waiting for someone to join
them on their journey to the unknown horizon where they are gazing.

## Final remarks

[]{#_heading=h.3dy6vkm .anchor}

The recent Planalto Riots have prompted us to reconsider the
significance and agency of the architecture, design objects, and
artworks located at Praça dos Três Poderes. As an art historian, I
strongly suggest that we integrate the artworks into the narratives we
create about this tragic event that has left yet another scar on
Brazilian history. Furthermore, we should not only repair the damaged
objects, but also collaborate to reimagine the role of art in the spaces
of government and judiciary power. Although the objects were damaged
during the riots, they should not be considered powerless. In fact, the
rioters managed to activate the symbolic meaning and material force of
resistance inherent in these objects. Through their existence, these
objects have become active participants in a protest against neofascism
and today serve as symbols of the preservation of democratic culture.

The 8th of January 2023 can be seen as a traumatic day in the history of
Brazilian democracy. It is one of many such traumas that the country has
faced. Bolsonarismo, according to Rodrigo Nunes, views politics as a
battle to the death where anything goes.[^24] This attitude may stem
from Brazil's historical formation, where the state apparatus often
masks an archaic structure of command inherited from the colonial
division of labor. Local landowners have long confused their private
interests with those of the public.[^25] During the Planalto Riots, the
ghost of authoritarian rule returned, embodied in the figure of
Bolsonaro, and transformed into a mass movement. While the rioters may
have reenacted the 1964 military coup in a farcical manner, it is
important to pay attention to the historical forces at play. In my view,
the damaged artworks and designed objects reveal the material and
symbolic dimensions of neofascist violence. For instance, this violence
represents an abuse of justice and an aggressive resentment toward the
representation of Black women in sites of governmental power.

The white curvy walls of Niemeyer's governmental buildings may seem like
an architectural relic of modernism's failed attempt to suppress
Brazil's history. In recent years, many Brazilian artists have engaged
in a critical dialogue with the country's modernist cultural heritage,
connecting it with the history of slavery and colonialism. For instance,
Arjan Martin's Complexo atlântico (Atlantic Complex - Rope), 2020,
showcased at the Ciccillo Matarazzo pavilion during the 34th São Paulo
Biennial, features a rusty anchor and a thick rope that stretches across
the building's floor, stopping the messianic flight embodied by
Niemeyer's iconic modernist structure.[^26]

What is arguably needed at Planalto are artworks that resonate with the
historical traumas and make the governmental buildings come alive. We
cannot expect art in governmental spaces to smooth over the
authoritarian and bloody legacy that continues to haunt Brazilian
society as a ghost from its fascist and colonial past. On the contrary,
artworks at these sites should remind us that governmental power cannot
be separated from this part of history.

## Bibliography

Agamben, Giorgio, State of Exception, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2005.

Calirman, Claudia. Brazilian art under dictatorship: Antonio Manuel,
Artur Barrio, and Cildo Meireles, Durham: Duke University Press, 2012.

Chamon, Andréa Marques. As “mulatas" de Di Cavalcanti – um estudo em
Psicologia Social, Master thesis, Faculdade de Filosofia e Ciências
Humanas da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, 2017.

Gamboni, Dario. The Destruction of Art: Iconoclasm & Vandalism Since the
French Revolution, London: Reaktion, 1997.

Giani MonteiroI, Mario Francisco; Ferreira RomioII, Jackeline Aparecida
and Drezett, Jefferson. ‘Is There Race/Color Differential on Femicide in
Brazil? The Inequality of Mortality Rates for Violent Causes Among White
and Black Women´, Journal of Human Growth and Development 31 \[Online\],
no.2 (May/August 2021): 359–366.

Holston, James. The Modernist City: An Anthropological Critique of
Brasília, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.

Lannes, Paulo. ’Moreira Franco usa mesa histórica de JK e revolta
curadores’, *Metrópoles*, 9 March 2017,
https://www.metropoles.com/entretenimento/politica-cultural/moreira-franco-usa-mesa-historica-de-jk-e-revolta-curadores.

Lazzarotto Simioni, Rafael. ’Arte e direito: A Justiça, de Alfredo
Ceschiatti, no STF’, *Suprema: revista de estudos constitucionais* 1
(July/December 2021): 221–255.

Nunes, Rodrigo. ‘Of what is Bolsonaro the name?’, *Radical Philosophy*
209 (Winter 2020): 3–14.

Masters, Edgar Lee. *Spoon River Anthology,* New York: Collier Books,
1967.

Mitchell, W. J. T. *Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology*, Chicago: Univ. of
Chicago Press, 1986

Prosperi, Adriano. *Justice Blindfolded: The Historical Course of an
Image*, trans. John Tedeschi & Anne C. Tedeschi, Leiden: Brill, 2018.

’Saiu uma reforma de Temer: a dos móveis do Palácio do Planalto’,
*Gazeta do povo*, 6 November, 2017.
https://www.gazetadopovo.com.br/politica/republica/saiu-uma-reforma-de-temer-a-dos-moveis-do-palacio-do-planalto-5fug8enmdy0io9678kryewsdk/.

Simões, Eduardo, ’Da sala de jantar de navio ao Salão Nobre, a viagem de
'As Mulatas' até a depredação’, *Neofeed*, 14 January 2023,
https://neofeed.com.br/blog/home/de-sala-de-jantar-de-navio-ao-salao-nobre-a-viagem-de-as-mulatas-ate-a-depredacao/.

Svanelid, Oscar, ‘The São Paulo Biennial Ventures Deep Into the
Brazilian Darkness’, Kunstkritikk, 22 October 2021,
https://kunstkritikk.com/the-sao-paulo-biennial-ventures-deep-into-the-brazilian-darkness/.

Thotti, ’We Too Were Modern, Part II: The Tropical Ghost Is a Cannibal’,
*e-flux Journal* 134 (March 2023),
https://www.e-flux.com/journal/134/525520/we-too-were-modern-part-ii-the-tropical-ghost-is-a-cannibal/.

––––––. ‘We Too Were Modern, Part I: Of Brazilian Autophagic Flowers and
Navigators’, *e-flux Journal* 133 (February 2023),
https://www.e-flux.com/journal/133/516348/we-too-were-modern-part-i-of-brazilian-autophagic-flowers-and-navigators/.

Uribe, Gustavo, ‘Mesa de JK no Planalto deve passar por restauração e
ser aposentada’, *CNN Brasil*, 5 January 2023,
https://www.cnnbrasil.com.br/politica/mesa-de-jk-no-planalto-deve-passar-por-restauracao-e-ser-aposentada/.

[^1]: Senior Lecturer and Postdoctoral Researcher in Art History at the
    Institution of Culture and Education at Södertörn University. Email:
    oscar.svanelid@sh.se

[^2]: A quote from Antonio Gramsci reprinted in yellow and green on
    posters in artist Alfredo Jaar’s work Chiraoscuro (2021) at the
    34^th^ Bienal de São Paulo.

[^3]: Rodrigo Nunes, ‘Of What Is Bolsonaro the Name?’, *Radical
    Philosophy 209* (Winter 2020), p 8.

[^4]: For a vivid reflection on the notion of terror in Bolsonarismo,
    see Thotti, ‘We Too Were Modern, Part I: Of Brazilian Autophagic
    Flowers and Navigators’, *e-flux Journal* 133 (February 2023),
    https://www.e-flux.com/journal/133/516348/we-too-were-modern-part-i-of-brazilian-autophagic-flowers-and-navigators/.
    []{#_heading=h.gjdgxs_Copy_1 .anchor}

[^5]: W. J. T. Mitchell, *Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology*, Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 1986.[]{#_heading=h.30j0zll_Copy_1
    .anchor}

[^6]: Dario Gamboni, *The Destruction of Art: Iconoclasm & Vandalism
    Since the French Revolution*, London: Reaktion, 1997, pp.17–20.

[^7]: In 1957, Lúcio Costa submitted his Plano Piloto as his proposal
    for the construction of Brazil’s new capital Brasilia. His proposal
    consisted of a series of simpler sketches beginning with a black
    cross against a white background.

[^8]: See James Holston, *The Modernist City: An Anthropological
    Critique of Brasília*, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989,
    p. 60–74.

[^9]: Holston, *The Modernist City*, p. 211–217.

[^10]: Gustavo Uribe, ‘Mesa de JK no Planalto deve passar por
    restauração e ser aposentada’, *CNN Brasil*, 5 January 2023,
    https://www.cnnbrasil.com.br/politica/mesa-de-jk-no-planalto-deve-passar-por-restauracao-e-ser-aposentada/.

[^11]: Uribe, ‘Mesa de JK no Planalto deve passar por restauração e ser
    aposentada’.

[^12]: In 1968, the Brazilian dictator Artur da Costa e Silva issued a
    decree called AI5, which resulted in the suspension of habeas
    corpus. This led to a significant increase in the use of torture and
    the execution of political opposition members. Additionally, it led
    to the censorship of the media and the arts, which were closely
    monitored for any messages that could be interpreted as subverting
    political and moral values. For an analysis of artistic responses to
    AI5, see Claudia Calirman, *Brazilian art under dictatorship:
    Antonio Manuel, Artur Barrio, and Cildo Meireles*, Durham: Duke
    University Press, 2012.

[^13]: Michel Temer served as vice president for Dilma Rousseff during
    her second term as president (2014-2016) and subsequently replaced
    her in May 2016 as the President of Brazil after a highly
    controversial impeachment process in which he was actively involved.

[^14]: See, ’Saiu uma reforma de Temer: a dos móveis do Palácio do
    Planalto’, *Gazeta do povo*, 6 November, 2017.
    https://www.gazetadopovo.com.br/politica/republica/saiu-uma-reforma-de-temer-a-dos-moveis-do-palacio-do-planalto-5fug8enmdy0io9678kryewsdk/.

[^15]: Rafael Lazzarotto Simioni, ’Arte e direito: A Justiça, de Alfredo
    Ceschiatti, no STF’, *Suprema: revista de estudos constitucionais* 1
    (July/December 2021), p. 248–250.[]{#_heading=h.tyjcwt_Copy_1
    .anchor}

[^16]: Giorgio Agamben, *State of Exception*, trans. Kevin Attell.
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    2005.[]{#_heading=h.2et92p0_Copy_1 .anchor}

[^17]: Adriano Prosperi, *Justice Blindfolded: The Historical Course of
    an Image*, trans. John Tedeschi & Anne C. Tedeschi, Leiden: Brill,
    2018, pp. 8-10.

[^18]: See Adriano Prosperi, *Justice Blindfolded*, p.60 and Rafael
    Lazzarotto Simioni, ‘’Arte e direito’, p.246.

[^19]: Cf. Edgar Lee Masters, *Spoon River Anthology*, New York: Collier
    Books, 1967, cit in Adriano Prosperi, *Justice Blindfolded*, p.IX.

[^20]: It seems that Di Cavalcanti did not title the work, and the title
    *As mulatas* was projected onto the painting by gallerists and
    collectors.

[^21]: Mario Francisco Giani MonteiroI, Jackeline Aparecida Ferreira
    RomioII and Jefferson Drezett, ‘Is There Race/Color Differential on
    Femicide in Brazil? The Inequality of Mortality Rates for Violent
    Causes Among White and Black Women´, *Journal of Human Growth and
    Development* 31.2 (May/August 2021), p. 363.

[^22]: Eduardo Simões, ’Da sala de jantar de navio ao Salão Nobre, a
    viagem de 'As Mulatas' até a depredação’, *Neofeed*, 14 January
    2023,
    https://neofeed.com.br/blog/home/de-sala-de-jantar-de-navio-ao-salao-nobre-a-viagem-de-as-mulatas-ate-a-depredacao/.

[^23]: For an engaged reading, see Andréa Marques Chamon, *As ‘mulatas’
    de Di Cavalcanti – um estudo em Psicologia Social*, Master thesis,
    Faculdade de Filosofia e Ciências Humanas da Universidade Federal de
    Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, 2017.

[^24]: Rodrigo Nunes, ‘Of What Is Bolsonaro the Name?’, p.9.

[^25]: Rodrigo Nunes, ‘Of What Is Bolsonaro the Name?’, p. 10.

[^26]: This work is discussed in more detail in my review of the 34th
    São Paulo Biennial. Oscar Svanelid, ‘The São Paulo Biennial Ventures
    Deep Into the Brazilian Darkness’, *Kunstkritikk*, 22 October 2021,
    https://kunstkritikk.com/the-sao-paulo-biennial-ventures-deep-into-the-brazilian-darkness/.
