---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Indigenizing Democracy: 'Never again a Brazil without us'

### Bartira S. Fortes


## PROLOGUE - The Cocar[^2] and the Sash: Indigenous Participation in the Presidential Handover

![Figure 1: President Lula alongside representatives of the Brazilian
civil society ascending the Planalto ramp for the presidential sash
handover ceremony on January 1, 2023. Photo: Ricardo Stuckert.](imgs/22_1.jpg)

On January 1, 2023, the frigid Swedish winter provided a striking
contrast to the warmth and vibrant atmosphere surrounding the
inauguration of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, also known as Lula, as the
President of Brazil. In the confines of my living room, sheltered from
the icy temperatures outside, I immersed myself in the unfolding of this
significant milestone in the country's political landscape. Through a
live broadcast, I caught glimpses of the evolving events and witnessed
people from all corners of Brazil expressing their aspirations for a
peaceful transition of power and a renewed commitment to democratic
values. As a Brazilian artivist and anthropologist living in Sweden,
conducting research on Indigenous struggles, my attempt to comprehend
the political transformations within my motherland drew heavily upon my
personal experiences. My reflections went beyond typical fieldwork
observations, as they were imbued with a profound emotional attachment,
interweaving feelings of excitement, hope, relief, and care, as well as
uneasiness and concern.

How does one adequately convey the magnitude of the tangible losses,
encompassing both human and non-human lives, resulting from the
systematic neglect of Indigenous rights and the devastating destruction
of ancestral territories, compounded by the mismanagement of the
COVID-19 pandemic in Brazil over the past years?[^3] While many of us
have witnessed these events from afar, it is crucial to acknowledges
that the tragic consequences have not only led to immeasurable loss of
lives but have also significantly shaped subjectivities. In the face of
such challenging circumstances, the presidential inauguration emerged as
a glimpse of hope and a promising sign of better times. It became a
moment to catch our breath, to embrace the present celebration, even as
a sense of apprehension for the uncertain path that lies ahead lingers
on. On this momentous day, the prevailing jubilation momentarily set
aside my analytical lens, allowing me to fully immerse myself in the
joyous atmosphere. Notifications flooded my group chats, brimming with
emojis, memes, and heartfelt messages accompanied by virtual hugs,
videos, and pictures capturing the vibrant festivities happening on the
streets. Amidst the virtual cheering, I navigated the challenges posed
by distance and varying time zones and embraced the opportunity to be
united in celebration.

Glued to my computer screen, I watched Lula's inauguration speech,
wherein he summoned the spirit of unity in a divided nation. During his
address, he made a resolute commitment to tackle the pressing political,
social, and economic challenges that had plagued the country,
particularly in the past seven years[^4]. Lula vowed to strengthen
democratic institutions, champion social equality, and combat the perils
of climate change, framing Brazil's environmental commitments and
Indigenous rights as the wellspring from which the country would regain
its standing on the global stage and restore its democratic ideals:

> Indigenous peoples need to have their lands demarcated and free from the
> threats of illegal and predatory economic activities. Their culture must
> be preserved, their dignity respected, and sustainability ensured. They
> are not hindrances to development -- they are guardians of our rivers
> and forests and an essential part of our greatness as a nation.
> Therefore, we are creating the Ministry of Indigenous Peoples to combat
> 500 years of inequality.[^5]

Shortly after delivering his speech, Lula stood alongside Sônia
Guajajara, a prominent Indigenous leader and elected Federal Deputy.
Side by side, they signed a decree[^6] that established the Ministry of
Indigenous Peoples, an unparalleled first in the annals of Brazilian
politics. This historic moment marked the creation of a ministry
entirely devoted to addressing the pressing demands of Indigenous
peoples. With this momentous step taken at his inauguration, Lula set a
precedent for future administrations to follow, underscoring the
paramount significance of Indigenous participation in shaping the
country's policies.

In the wake of this unprecedented event, speculations reverberated
across news outlets and social media platforms about who would take on
the symbolic duty of handing over the presidential sash to Lula -- a
tradition that represents the peaceful transfer of power. The refusal of
former president Jair Bolsonaro to partake in the sashing ceremony
sparked debates on the profound divisions that had plagued the country
and the urgency of healing those rifts, adding a layer of intrigue to
the unfolding drama. Who would emerge as the influential figure to take
the stage? Rumors circulated the digital sphere as names were thrust
into the spotlight. The significance of these speculations reached
beyond a mere ceremonial gesture, symbolizing the importance of
upholding democratic values in times of political turmoil.

The pivotal moment had finally arrived. Lula stood before the crowd. As
he ascended the Planalto ramp, the crisp air of the Swedish winter
seemed to dissipate. In a remarkable twist, the task of presenting the
presidential sash to Lula was not bestowed upon a high-ranking
statesperson, but rather on a group of individuals representing the
struggles of various marginalized segments of Brazilian civil society
(Figure 1).[^7] The crowd erupted in applause. This unexpected choice
carried an important symbolism, indicating a departure from conventional
norms, and embracing a democratic ethos that affirms multiple collective
voices.

This significance of the sash handover was further enhanced by the
notable representation of Indigenous people within the group. Chief
Raoni Metuktire,[^8] an esteemed Indigenous leader and environmental
advocate, stood among them, adorned in a yellow *cocar*. The *cocar*, a
sacred Indigenous feather headdress, holds profound cultural meaning for
Indigenous peoples. The motto 'Antes do Brasil da coroa, existe o Brasil
do cocar' ('Before the Brazil of the crown, there is the Brazil of the
cocar') has been adopted by several social movements and activists
dedicated to advocating for Indigenous rights. This motto speaks to the
colonization that began in the early 1500s, where the *cocar* was
replaced by the Portuguese crown, resulting in the devastating impact of
the near-extinction of approximately ninety percent of the Indigenous
populations within the first century of European contact in present-day
South America.[^9] This powerful statement reflects the ongoing struggle
for recognition and justice, bringing forth a necessary reckoning with
colonial legacies, urging Brazil to indigenize[^10] its democracy,
confront historical injustices, and redefine national identities.

The joint ascent of Chief Raoni and President Lula up the Planalto ramp
signified not only a renewed commitment to Indigenous rights but also
added a crucial dimension to Brazil's democracy. In this pivotal moment,
Indigenous peoples, who have long endured marginalization under
persistent colonial power structures, stood at the forefront of the
country's future. The act of bestowing the sash, traditionally a symbol
of power and authority, now held a deeper meaning -- it became a conduit
for the recognition of the plurality of cultures, languages, and
ontologies at the core of our societies. The prologue to the
presidential inauguration had set the stage for a new chapter in
Brazilian politics. It served as a powerful statement: the country's
democracy can only thrive through the acknowledgment and political
participation of Indigenous peoples.

As the vibrant festivities subside, an underlying concern resurfaces,
casting a shadow over the horizon: Will the newly elected government be
able to uphold its commitments to demarcate Indigenous lands and
confront the pervasive exploitative economic activities within these
territories? This question encapsulates the complexity of the task at
hand, particularly in a country where the political and economic elite
predominantly adheres to a colonialist view of Indigenous peoples as
hindrances to progress, deeply anchored in an extractive,
growth-oriented development model. The attainment of these objectives
underscores the necessity for continued collective efforts that
transcend mere rhetoric, as it entails challenging deeply ingrained
power dynamics and structural inequalities that perpetuate environmental
exploitation and the disregard for the fundamental rights of Indigenous
peoples. Navigating the path forward will undoubtedly present formidable
challenges.

## ACT 1 -- Future Brazil: Reclaiming Democracy through Indigenous Art

![Figure 2: Daiara Tukano, *A queda do céu e a mãe de todas as lutas* (The
Falling Sky and the Mother of All Struggles), 2023. Part of the
exhibition *Brasil futuro: As formas da democracia* (*Future Brazil: The
Forms of Democracy*).[^11] Photo: Marina Gadelha / ASCOM SECEC DF.](imgs/22_2.jpg)


In conjunction with the presidential inauguration, the National Museum
of the Republic in Brazil unveiled the exhibition Brasil Futuro: as
Formas da Democracia (Future Brazil: The Forms of Democracy). Driven by
a sense of curiosity, I navigated through online platforms, embarking on
a quest to explore the exhibition's visual compositions and messages.
The exhibition featured a diverse collection of Brazilian artworks, with
the notable presence of Contemporary Indigenous Art[^12] through the
contributions of Indigenous artists who have solidified their pivotal
role in the decolonial turn within the Brazilian art scene.[^13] Daiara
Tukano, Jaider Esbell, Ailton Krenak, Denilson Baniwa, Yacunã Tuxá,
Gustavo Caboco, Edgar Kanaykô Xakriabá, Arissana Pataxó, among others
Indigenous artists from a diverse range of ethnicities, wove their
perspectives into the exhibition's multifaceted portrayal of the
country's path forward.

Amongst the artworks on display was the painting A queda do céu e a mãe
de todas as lutas (The falling sky and the mother of all struggles)
(Figure 2) by Daiara Tukano, an artist, activist, educator, and
communicator from the Eremiri Húusiro Parameri clan of the Yepá Mahsã
people, also known as Tukano, from the Upper Rio Negro in the Brazilian
Amazon. Her site-specific painting intervention conveyed a powerful
message about the crucial role of Indigenous peoples in the foundation
of democracy in Brazil. A short text beside the artwork reads:

> To love life as the sky loves the earth and as the earth loves the sky.
> The forest that holds up the sky has already spoken: Democracy is to
> demarcate all Indigenous lands. Earth is the mother of all struggles.
> How much more grief for how many worlds can we endure? The problem runs
> deep, and the sky is high above. Let us wake up to be able to dream of
> greater worlds. Añu Mahsã.[^14] [^15]

Inspired by the book *The Falling Sky*,[^16] Tukano's painting depicts a
woman, symbolizing the Earth, holding the sky, portrayed as a male body
with a bird's head.[^17] Written by Davi Kopenawa, shaman and spokesman
for the Yanomami of the Brazilian Amazon, in collaboration with
anthropologist Bruce Albert, *The Falling Sky* explores the Yanomami
people's cosmology and its relationship to Indigenous rights and the
environment.[^18] The title of Tukano's artwork refers to the Yanomami
belief that the sky is falling, a symbol of the depletion of the Earth
through the expansion of the detrimental consequences of misguided
extractive activities. In alignment with the Yanomami ontology, this
depletion ultimately leads to a collapse of the balance between the
earth and the sky.[^19] Kopenawa asserts that signs of this impending
collapse are becoming evident as the minerals that provide strength to
the earth have been extracted at an alarming rate. This worldview forms
the foundation for the Yanomami struggle against predatory extractive
activities within their territories.[^20] By incorporating elements of
Yanomami cosmology, Tukano sheds light on the importance of Indigenous
knowledge in tackling environmental challenges and offers a critique of
extractivism's destructive forces.

At the core of the painting, Tukano presents her interpretation of a
sacred red feather cloak belonging to the Tupinambá people. The
Tupinambá cloaks had been stripped away from their cultural context and
transformed into ethnographic artifacts confined within the walls of
museums in Europe.[^21] The presence of a Tupinambá cloak prominently
depicted in the painting serves as a poignant reminder of the enduring
colonial power dynamics embedded within museums, emphasizing the urgency
to reclaim spaces that have historically subjugated and exoticized
Indigenous peoples. Resonating within the broader socio-political
landscape of Brazil, Tukano's artwork provides a thought-provoking
reflection on the intricate intersections of art, democracy,
decolonization, and Indigenous struggles.

To further enrich my virtual exploration of the exhibition, I joined a
live stream on Tukano's Instagram account. During the stream, she
provided insights into the meaning and purpose of her artwork, adding a
layer of interactive engagement to the virtual experience. In her words:

> For us \[Indigenous peoples\], democracy has never existed. But it is a
> beautiful utopia, and we will fight for it until our last breath. To
> engage in this \[democratic\] exercise, we can only do it together, by
> being able to dialogue on equal terms \[\...\] including understanding
> what art is. In my language, there is a word that might be closer to
> art, hori, which means miracle, vision, light, color. It represents a
> vision that goes beyond what the eyes can see, but rather the vision of
> the spirit.[^22]

By intertwining ancestral heritage with hori[^23] expressions, Tukano
reflected a commitment to decolonizing not only the realm of art but
also the political sphere. This artistic-spiritual endeavor sparked
meaningful conversations about the value of Indigenous contributions in
tackling pressing contemporary challenges, notably the far-reaching
implications of climate change on societal, political, and economic
levels. The incorporation of Indigenous art in the exhibition
represented a noteworthy stride toward recognizing the transformative
role of Indigenous peoples in shaping the trajectory of Brazil's
democracy.

The new momentum of Indigenous artists' participation in the exhibition
Brasil Futuro: as Formas da Democracia was highlighted by the
projections of their artworks onto the façade of the National Congress
during the Festival do Futuro (Future Festival). A festive part of the
presidential inauguration, the festival encompassed performances and
concerts by regional and national artists.[^24] In addition to the
significant presence of Indigenous art and representation in the
presidential inauguration, another ground-breaking moment occurred
during the festival when Indigenous singer Kaê Guajajara, accompanied by
Indigenous rapper Kandú Puri and the Indigenous rap group Nativos Mcs,
took the stage. As I tuned in to the live performances, the powerful
voice of Kaê Guajajara echoed through on the screen:

> I am Indigenous, an Indigenous slum dweller\
> I will not accept mere crumbs\
> I will never be content with neglect, with hunger,\
> With living on the fringes of a system we did not choose\
> That has robbed, invaded, and imposed upon us
> 
> All this gold, all this wealth\
> Filled with blood\
> Built upon our bodies\
> My mother taught me to listen and hide\
> And the slum taught me to fight[^25]

With messages of Indigenous resistance, these events marked an
unprecedented milestone in Brazil's history, as Indigenous peoples had
never played such a role in a presidential inauguration. The active
involvement of Indigenous peoples represented not only the diverse
dimensions of Indigenous perspectives but also posed a challenge to
dominant narratives and power structures deeply ingrained in Brazilian
politics.

## ACT 2 -- Unmasking Colonial Violence: 'What if it were us?'

![Figure 3: The photo depicts Valda Ferreira de Souza, an Indigenous
Sateré-Mawé woman, holding her baby while resisting a military operation
to remove people from the land in Lagoa Azul, Manaus. Taken by Luiz
Vasconcelos in 2008, the photo was awarded first place in the General
News category of the 2009 World Press Photo Contest.[^26]](imgs/22_3.jpg)


While the country rejoiced in the presidential inauguration, opposition
forces were already plotting to dismantle the hard-fought democratic
foundations. In a shocking turn of events, a violent mob clad in green
and yellow stormed the Supreme Federal Court, the National Congress
building, and the Planalto Palace at the Three Powers Square, leaving
destruction in their wake. On the fateful day of January 8, 2023, a
foreboding shadow of a coup attempt loomed over the streets of Brasilia.
Their objective was clear: to incite military leaders into launching a
coup d\'état and disrupt the transition of power. The Planalto riots
reverberated across the country, sending shockwaves that endangered the
hopes of democracy.

During this tumultuous day, Indigenous peoples, who had long been a
target of police repression, witnessed the invasion of the country's
most vital democratic institutions, as a green and yellow[^27] mob
fearlessly infiltrated and carried out attacks with minimal opposition
from the military police. Célia Xakriabá, the first Indigenous woman
from Minas Gerais to be elected to the Federal Congress in 2022,
promptly shared images of police violence against Indigenous peoples
(Figure 3), accompanied by the words: 'And what if it were us,
Indigenous peoples and other social movements? Look at how we have
always been treated'.[^28] The disproportionate use of police force
against Indigenous peoples, compared to the response to the coup
attempt, was further acknowledged by the Indigenous Peoples Articulation
of Brazil (APIB):[^29]

> For over 500 years, Indigenous peoples have resisted the establishment
> of a state that institutionally attacks, kills, and tears apart various
> Indigenous communities throughout Brazilian territory. In a politically
> significant moment, precisely when a democratically elected government
> gives prominence to the protection of Indigenous peoples, symbolically
> marked by the participation of Chief Raoni in the presidential
> inauguration on January 1, it is repugnant to witness the scenes of
> vandalism and terrorism that took place on January 8, 2023, in
> Brasília/DF.[^30]

In the aftermath of the failed coup attempt, the wounds inflicted on
Brazilian democracy were not only physical but also symbolic. The
Planalto riots exposed the deep-rooted colonial history and its lasting
impact on Indigenous communities, laying bare the 'open veins of Latin
America'.[^31] As the country grappled with the aftermath and sought
healing, it became clear that these events went beyond a battle for
political power. They served as a stark reminder of the need to
strengthen democratic institutions, confront historical injustices, and
reshape subjectivities. The unfolding of the Planalto riots brought into
focus the ongoing challenges faced by Indigenous movements and the
aspirations for the indigenization of democracy, revealing the systemic
repression and enduring presence of colonial power structures that
continue to shape Brazil.

## ACT 3 - The Sacred Echo of the *Maracá*[^32]: 'It is Time to Indigenize Politics and Reforest Minds'

![Figure 4: Sônia Guajajara is lifted by Indigenous people at the end of
her inauguration ceremony as Minister of Indigenous Peoples on January
11, 2023. Photo: Jacqueline Lisboa / WWF-Brasil.](imgs/22_4.jpg)

As a result of the repercussions caused by the Planalto riots, the
National Museum of the Republic, along with the exhibition *Brasil
Futuro: As Formas da Democracia*, had to undergo a temporary closure.
Amidst the turmoil, Indigenous Federal Deputy Sônia Guajajara emerged to
embrace the historic role as Brazil's first Minister of Indigenous
People, in a joint ceremony alongside journalist and activist Anielle
Franco,[^33] who assumed the position of Minister of Racial Equality.
With great anticipation, I followed their historic inauguration through
a live stream on YouTube.[^34]

The ceremony took place on January 11, 2023, at the Planalto Palace, a
poignant venue that still bore traces of the destruction that occurred
on January 8. This significant event brought together numerous
representatives from Afro-descendant and Indigenous communities. As part
of the opening proceedings, a bilingual rendition of the Brazilian
National Anthem was performed, partly in the Tikuna language by
Indigenous singer Djuena Tikuna, and partly in Portuguese by
Afro-Brazilian singer Marina Íris. The ceremony was further enriched by
the presence of ancestral songs and dances performed by the Guarani and
Terena peoples, along with the participation of the Candomblé group
Afoxé Ogum Pá.[^35] Their performances brought a sense of cultural
heritage and spiritual resonance to the event.

Guajajara was the first to be sworn in. Her impactful swearing-in speech
took us back to a significant moment in her life. At the age of 17, she
got called in by her aunt Maria Santana, a spiritual leader and midwife,
urging her to visit Aldeia Lagoa Quieta in the Araribóia Indigenous
territory. There, her aunt bestowed upon her two gifts -- a necklace and
a maracá, designating her as the spokesperson for their people:

> I want to give you these gifts, symbols of leadership. I pass on to you
> the power of words. You will have the gift of communication, and
> everyone will listen to you. You will grow, and your voice will be
> heard. This *maracá* will echo, and you will be the spokesperson for our
> people.[^36]

Holding her sacred *maracá* (Figure 4), Minister Sônia Guajajara
recognized that her appointment as minister was a testament to the
ancestral and spiritual strength of the Guajajara Tentehar people, the
centuries-long resistance of Indigenous peoples, and her own unwavering
determination. She acknowledged the significance of this moment of
historic transition, drawing parallels to the unique Indigenous
collaboration witnessed during the National Constituent Assembly in
1987,[^37] which ultimately led to the inclusion of Articles 231 and 232
in the 1988 Constitution of the Federative Republic of Brazil,[^38]
formally recognizing Indigenous rights and marking a transformative
milestone after 21 years under military rule (1964-1985).

However, even with the advent of the new democratic Constitution
signifying a departure from the authoritarian and colonial mindset,
Indigenous territories continued to be targets of invasions and attacks
perpetrated by groups involved in illegal activities. These incursions
have led to widespread deforestation, contamination of rivers, loss of
biodiversity, and destruction of sacred sites. The consequences extend
beyond environmental concerns, as Indigenous peoples have endured
violations of basic human rights, forced displacement, spread of
diseases, and mass deaths. In her inauguration speech, Guajajara
addressed these issues and affirmed her commitment to protect Indigenous
rights and strengthen environmental legislation.

Soon after the establishment of the Ministry of Indigenous Peoples, came
the harsh reality of the humanitarian crisis experienced by the Yanomami
people. Accusations of genocide committed against the Yanomami were
directed at Bolsonaro's administration (2019-2022).[^39] This accusation
comes in the wake of public outrage after images of emaciated Yanomami
people spread globally and the newly elected government declared a
medical emergency on January 21, 2023.[^40] With the outbreak of the
COVID-19 pandemic and the insufficient responses of the state,[^41] the
Yanomami Indigenous territory (TIY)[^42] faced its most severe wave of
invasion since its demarcation over thirty years ago. A report by the
*Hutukara Yanomami Association* provides a comprehensive account of the
growth of illegal mining in the TIY during 2021.[^43] The report
elucidates how mining activities within the TIY have resulted in
systematic violations of human rights. Apart from deforestation and the
destruction of water bodies, illegal mining has led to a surge in
malaria cases and other infectious and contagious diseases, including
COVID-19. Additionally, there has been a distressing escalation of
violence against Indigenous people in the region.

Certainly, the task of confronting the deep-rooted harm caused by
centuries of colonization goes beyond political efforts in the quest to
indigenize politics. It requires a profound epistemic-ontological shift,
a commitment to 'reforest minds', as Guajajara puts it.[^44] Her
inauguration as a minister, along with the appointment of Indigenous
lawyer Joênia Wapichana as the first Indigenous woman to lead the
National Indigenous Peoples Foundation (FUNAI), adds an additional layer
of significance to these debates. These initiatives mark a notable shift
in the government's approach towards Indigenous issues and stand out for
presenting alternative, counter-colonial strategies to \'womanize\' and
\'indigenize\' politics, as frequently advocated by Indigenous Federal
Deputy Célia Xakriabá.[^45]

The creation of the Ministry of Indigenous People marks a pivotal moment
in reshaping power dynamics and prompts a reconfiguration of Brazil's
historical trajectory by addressing the legacies of colonization,
slavery, and systemic inequalities. Consequently, the inaugurations of
Franco and Guajajara hold immense significance in the debates
surrounding national culture, history, and identity, signifying a
departure from exclusionary narratives and a reclamation of the
ancestral roots of Brazil's diverse populations. As Guajajara
underscored in her closing statements: 'Never again a Brazil without
us!'[^46], leaving a resounding message on the importance of Indigenous
political participation in shaping Brazil's future.

## EPILOGUE -- 'Indigenous Future is Today: Without demarcation, there is no democracy!'

![Figure 5: Mobilization at the 19th Edition of Camp Terra Livre 2023
organized by APIB (Articulation of Indigenous Peoples of Brazil) between
24 and 28 April, Brasília. Photo Kamikia Kisêdjê/APIB.](imgs/22_5.jpg)


It has been nearly four months since the presidential inauguration took
place. On April 24, 2023, the 19th edition of *Camp Terra Livre*
2023[^47] initiated in Brasília, centered around the theme *The*
*Indigenous Future is Today: Without demarcation, there is no
democracy!*[^48] (Figure 5). A significant moment during the gathering
was the official declaration of a Climate Emergency, which emphasized
Indigenous peoples' commitment to protect the country's ecosystems.
Furthermore, it reinforced the transformative potential of demarcating
Indigenous territories as a vital policy to address the climate crisis.
The primary focus remained on advocating for land demarcation and
opposing pending legislative proposals that pose threats to Indigenous
peoples, particularly the controversial legal theory regarding
Indigenous land rights known as the *Marco Temporal* (Temporal
Milestone).

Regarded as anti-Indigenous, the Temporal Milestone theory asserts that
Indigenous peoples can only have their land demarcated if they can
provide evidence of their physical presence on their ancestral territory
on the precise date of the Constitution's promulgation on October 5,
1988. This requirement places a burden of proof on Indigenous
communities that is difficult to meet and undermines their legitimate
claims to ancestral lands. In addition to the difficulty of providing
evidence of physical presence on a specific date from decades ago, many
Indigenous communities were dispossessed of their lands during the
period leading up to and following the Constitution's promulgation.
Violent conflicts and historical injustices have resulted in forced
displacements and loss of ancestral territories.

Land demarcation is of paramount importance for Indigenous people, as it
serves as a crucial mechanism to ensure the legal recognition and
protection of ancestral territories, safeguarding them from invasions,
exploitation, and illegal activities. The importance of demarcation
extends beyond the mere assertion of land rights; it is intricately tied
to the preservation of cultural heritage and the safeguarding the
environment and its biodiversity. Indigenous territories often serve as
vital ecological reserves and contribute to the sustainable management
of natural resources. Therefore, the demarcation process not only
protects Indigenous rights but also has broader implications for
environmental preservation.

Indigenous communities faced yet another severe setback as the National
Congress passed Provisional Measure 1154/23, removing the Ministry of
Indigenous Peoples' crucial authority over the land demarcation process.
This decision has raised significant concerns among Indigenous peoples
who recognize the vital role of the ministry in protecting their
ancestral lands. The detrimental actions did not stop there. The
approval of the urgency request of Bill 490/07, which allows water,
energy, and mining exploitation in Indigenous territories without
consulting affected Indigenous communities, poses the risk of legalizing
the exploitation of their lands and resources without their consent.
Additionally, the approval of Provisional Measure 1150/2022 can
intensify the threat to the environment and vulnerable populations, as
it facilitates increased deforestation in the Atlantic Forest.[^49]

As one reflects upon the process of indigenizing democracy in Brazil, it
is essential to acknowledge the challenges that lie ahead. The issue at
hand extends far beyond promises and political calculations. The task of
indigenizing politics, and challenging patriarchal and colonial
legacies, in a country where the political and economic elites
predominantly adhere to such perspectives, presents a steep uphill
battle for any leader who seeks to prioritize the rights of Indigenous
peoples. While Lula has expressed his commitment to standing alongside
Indigenous peoples, he faces significant hurdles in navigating the
delicate balance between Indigenous rights and the interests of powerful
economic forces. Nevertheless, Lula's ability to address this urgent
matter holds immense importance not only for Indigenous peoples but also
for upholding Brazil's standing on the global stage.

Environmental protection has become a cornerstone of the process of
indigenizing democracy, informed by the vital role of Indigenous
knowledge in preserving the planet. In Brazil, Indigenous peoples have
emerged as the guardians of the Amazon rainforest, advocating for its
protection, and taking a leading role in combating deforestation and
addressing climate change. The increasing political participation of
Indigenous peoples, particularly women, has been pivotal in amplifying
environmental justice initiatives on both national and international
platforms, challenging patriarchal norms in the process. Through their
active engagement in international arenas, Indigenous leaders have
forged alliances and raised awareness about the importance of Indigenous
knowledge in tackling global challenges.

While advancements have been made, this epilogue serves as a compelling
call to action, urging individuals, communities, institutions, and
governments to actively dismantle colonial structures, confront systemic
injustices, and create spaces where Indigenous voices can thrive. In
this decolonial journey towards indigenizing democracy, the words of
Davi Kopenawa's cosmo-ecological manifesto resonate through the *hori*
of Daiara Tukano: 'Earth is the mother of all struggles!'. The echoes of
Sônia Guajajara's *maracá* resound: 'It is time to indigenize politics
and reforest minds.' Célia Xakriabá has urged us to womanize politics,
further reinforcing the transformative journey ahead. From a distant
land, I bear witness to the winds of change sweeping across Brazil,
carrying with them the reverberations of Indigenous peoples' maracás and
the determination to forge a future where no democracy exists without
the demarcation of Indigenous territories. As the Indigenous leader and
thinker Ailton Krenak significantly expresses, the future is
ancestral![^50] 

## Bibliography

'Ancestralizou (Interlúdio)', Kaê Guajajara, Album *Kwarahy Tazyr*,
2021, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ha97GXeeElw

Articulação dos Povos Indígenas do Brasil (Org.). *Nossa luta é pela
vida: Covid-19 e povos indígenas, o enfrentamento das violências durante
a pandemia*, APIB, 2020,
https://emergenciaindigena.apiboficial.org/relatorio/.

Articulation of Indigenous Peoples of Brazil (ed.). *International
Complaints Dossier of Brazil's Indigenous Peoples*, APIB, 2021,
https://apiboficial.org/files/2021/08/DOSSIE_en_v3web.pdf.

APIB - Articulação dos Povos Indígenas do Brasil. 'Há mais de 500 anos
os povos indígenas resistem', Facebook post, 9 January 2023,
https://www.facebook.com/apiboficial/posts/3348975205372625/.

APIB. 'Sem demarcação não há democracia!', 28 April 2023,
https://apiboficial.org/2023/04/28/sem-demarcacao-nao-ha-democracia/.

APIBOFICIAL. 'Cerimônia de posse da Ministra Sonia Guajajara', YouTube
video, 11 January 2023, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SawBmzH8Fas.

\@celia.xakriaba. 'E se fosse nós, povos indígenas e outros movimentos
sociais?', 9 January 2023,
https://www.instagram.com/p/CnLAxMZPU1v/?igshid=NTc4MTIwNjQ2YQ%3D%3D.

Charny, Israel W. (ed.) *Encyclopedia of genocide*, Volume II, Santa
Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO, 1999.

\@daiaratukano. 'Brasil Futuro: As formas da Democracia -- Parte 2', 3
January 2023,
https://www.instagram.com/tv/Cm9r8h_he09/?igshid=NTc4MTIwNjQ2YQ==.

\@daiaratukano. 'A queda do céu e a mãe de todas as lutas', Instagram
post, 29 December 2022,
https://www.instagram.com/reel/CmwWwO5hTW9/?utm_source=ig_web_copy_link.

'Decreto nº 11.355', *Presidência da República*, 1 January 2023,
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/\_ato2023-2026/2023/decreto/D11355.htm.

'Discurso do presidente Lula no Parlatório do Palácio do Planalto',
*Planalto*, 6 January 2023,
https://www.gov.br/planalto/pt-br/acompanhe-o-planalto/discursos-e-pronunciamentos/2023/discurso-do-presidente-lula-no-parlatorio-do-palacio-do-planalto.

'Entenda as leis que promovem o desmonte dos Ministérios dos Povos
Indígenas e do Meio Ambiente', *Presidência da República*, 25 May 2023,
https://www.gov.br/povosindigenas/pt-br/assuntos/noticias/2023/05/entenda-as-leis-que-promovem-o-desmonte-dos-ministerios-dos-povos-indigenas-e-do-meio-ambiente.

Esbell, Jaider. 'Arte indígena contemporânea e o grande mundo',
*Select*, 7.39 (2018): 98-103,
https://www.select.art.br/arte-indigena-contemporanea-e-o-grande-mundo/.

Fortes, Bartira S. *Democracy, a Tragic Carnivalesque Hero: The
Narratives of a Transnational Social Movement Against the Coup in
Brazil*, Master's Thesis, Stockholm University, Department of Social
Anthropology, Stockholm/Sweden, 2020,
https://su.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2:1471748.

Galeano, Eduardo. *Open Veins of Latin America: Five Centuries of the
Pillage of a Continent*. Trans. Cedric Belfrage. London: Monthly Review
Press, 1973.

Guajajara, Sônia. 'It's time to indigenize politics and reforest minds',
*Sumaúma*, 27 September 2022,
https://sumauma.com/en/aldear-a-politica-e-reflorestar-mentes/.

Hutukara Associação Yanomami (Org.), *Yanomami Under Attack: illegal
wildcat mining on Yanomami Indigenous Land and proposals to combat it*,
Boa Vista: Hutukara Associação Yanomami, 2022,
https://acervo.socioambiental.org/sites/default/files/documents/yal00067_en.pdf

Hutukara Associação Yanomami, http://hutukara.org/.

Kopenawa, Davi and Bruce Albert. *The Falling Sky: Words of a Yanomami
Shaman*. Trans. Nicholas Elliott and Alison Dundy. London: The Belknap
Press of Harvard University press, 2013.

Krenak, Ailton. 'Discurso de Ailton Krenak, Em 04/09/1987, Na Assembleia
Constituinte, Brasília, Brasil', *GIS - Gesto, Imagem E Som - Revista De
Antropologia* 4.1 (2019): 421-22.
https://doi.org/10.11606/issn.2525-3123.gis.2019.162846.

Krenak, Ailton. *Futuro Ancestral*, São Paulo: Companhia das Letras,
2022.

'Leia a íntegra do discurso da ministra Sonia Guajajara', *UOL*, 11
January 2023,
https://noticias.uol.com.br/politica/ultimas-noticias/2023/01/11/leia-a-integra-do-discurso-da-ministra-sonia-guajajara.htm?cmpid=copiaecola.

\@LulaOficial, 'Mais que uma crise humanitária, o que vi em Roraima foi
um genocídio', Twitter post, 22 January 2023, 12:26 pm,
https://twitter.com/LulaOficial/status/1617121512506511368?s=20&t=3gY6cpiy14UYBfsxZIkFwA.

Medeiros, Jotabê. 'As Mirações de Daiara Tukano', *Amazônia Real*, 3
February 2023, https://amazoniareal.com.br/especiais/daiara-tukano/.

'Ministério da Saúde declara emergência em saúde pública em território
Yanomami', *Ministério da Saúde*, 21 January 2023,
https://www.gov.br/saude/pt-br/assuntos/noticias/2023/janeiro/ministerio-da-saude-declara-emergencia-em-saude-publica-em-territorio-yanomami.

Mondardo, Marcos and Zane do Nascimento. 'Povos indígenas, comunidades
quilombolas e migrações', *Revista Tocantinense de Geografia*, 12.26
(2023): 01--21, p. 5, DOI: 10.20873/rtg.v12i26.15747.

Paiva, Alessandra Simões. *A virada decolonial na arte brasileira*,
Bauru, SP: Editora Mireveja Ltda, 2022.

PT - Partido dos Trabalhadores. 'Ao vivo 01/01 \| A posse do presidente
Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva - Festival do Futuro', Youtube, 1 January
2023, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2FjXGLTKg0k (Accessed 21 May 2023)

*Raoni: The Fight for the Amazon* (dir. Jean-Pierre Dutilleux and Luiz
Carlos Saldanha, 1978).

Schwarcz, Lilia, Márcio Tavares, Rogério Carvalho and Paulo Vieira
(curators). 'Brasil Futuro: as Formas da Democracia', *National Museum
of the Republic*, Brasília, 1 January to 26 February 2023.

Senado Federal. *Constituição da República Federativa do Brasil*.
Brasília: Senado Federal, Coordenação de Edições Técnica, 1988,
https://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/constituicao/constituicao.htm.

'The National Museum of Denmark to Donate Rare Feather Cape to Brazil',
*Via Ritzau*, 27 June 2023,
https://via.ritzau.dk/pressemeddelelse/the-national-museum-of-denmark-to-donate-rare-feather-cape-to-brazil?publisherId=13560791&releaseId=13700505.

WHO - World Health Organization,
https://covid19.who.int/region/amro/country/br.

World Press Photo Contest,
https://www.worldpressphoto.org/collection/photo-contest/2009/luiz-vasconcelos/1.

[^1]: Bartira S. Fortes is a Brazilian performance artist,
    anthropologist, and Ph.D. candidate in Environmental studies at the
    Department of Environment, Development, and Sustainability Studies,
    Södertörn University, Sweden. E-mail: bartira.fortes@sh.se

[^2]: 'Cocar' refers to the traditional Indigenous feather headdress.

[^3]: The Articulation of Indigenous Peoples of Brazil (APIB) has called
    upon the International Criminal Court (ICC) to investigate former
    President Jair Bolsonaro (2019-2022). According to APIB, since
    assuming office in 2019, Bolsonaro has implemented a deliberate,
    systematic, and explicit anti-Indigenous policy, amounting to crimes
    against humanity, genocide, and ecocide. To support these claims,
    APIB has compiled a comprehensive dossier containing substantial
    data and evidence about the Bolsonaro administration's
    anti-Indigenous policies, see Articulação dos Povos Indígenas do
    Brasil (ed.), *International Complaints Dossier of Brazil's
    Indigenous Peoples*, APIB, 2021. Furthermore, APIB had previously
    published a report on the devastating impact of COVID-19 on
    Indigenous communities, see Articulação dos Povos Indígenas do
    Brasil (ed.), *Nossa luta é pela vida: COVID-19 e povos indígenas, o
    enfrentamento das violências durante a pandemia*, APIB, 2020). The
    report underscored the dismantling of crucial support structures
    that previously aided native peoples, shedding light on the
    conflicts, murders, attacks, invasions, and persecutions that these
    communities have endured during the first year of the pandemic.

[^4]: Brazil has endured significant political challenges since 2016,
    beginning with the impeachment of President Dilma Rousseff, a
    process that was widely regarded as a parliamentary coup. This
    political crisis sparked concerns about the potential implications
    of employing constitutional procedures such as impeachment to
    destabilize the democratic process in Latin America. The subsequent
    political imprisonment of Lula months before the 2018 presidential
    election, further exacerbated the political turmoil in the country.
    Lula's imprisonment, surrounded by irregularities and questionable
    circumstances, prompted immediate reactions and ignited debates
    about the violation of his right to be tried by an impartial
    tribunal and the potential political motivations behind his
    conviction. On March 14, 2018, Brazil faced another challenge with
    the political assassination of Marielle Franco, a councilwoman and
    influential advocate for the black feminist movement. This event
    sent shockwaves throughout the country, shedding light on the risks
    faced by those championing social justice. Amidst these challenges,
    Brazil underwent a significant political shift during the 2018
    elections, resulting in the victory of far-right candidate Jair
    Bolsonaro. The presidential election was characterized by intense
    polarization, instances of violence, and widespread dissemination of
    disinformation campaigns on social media, raising concerns about
    Bolsonaro's controversial rhetoric and policy positions.
    Collectively, these events have had a profound impact on Brazil's
    political climate. See Bartira S. Fortes, *Democracy, a Tragic
    Carnivalesque Hero: The Narratives of a Transnational Social
    Movement Against the Coup in Brazil*, Master's Thesis, Stockholm
    University, Department of Social Anthropology, Stockholm/Sweden,
    2020.

[^5]: 'Lula da Silva presidential address at the Planalto Palace no
    Parlatório do Palácio do Planalto', *Planalto*, 6 January 2023,
    *author's translation,*
    https://www.gov.br/planalto/pt-br/acompanhe-o-planalto/discursos-e-pronunciamentos/2023/discurso-do-presidente-lula-no-parlatorio-do-palacio-do-planalto

[^6]: 'Decreto nº 11.355', *Presidência da República*, 1 January 2023,
    http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/\_ato2023-2026/2023/decreto/D11355.htm.

[^7]: Among them were Aline Sousa, a garbage collector and recycling
    activist; Francisco Carlos do Nascimento, a 10-year-old boy; Ivan
    Baron, a person with disabilities and anti-ableism influencer;
    Weslley Viesba Rodrigues, a metalworker; Murilo de Quadros Jesus, an
    educator; Jucimara Fausto, a chef; Flávio Pereira, an artisan; and
    the Indigenous leader Raoni Metuktire. In a heartwarming gesture,
    even the presidential couple's dog named Resistência joined them as
    they ascended the Planalto ramp. Resistência had been adopted by
    Lula after faithfully remaining in front of the federal police
    headquarters in Curitiba for a significant part of the 580 days of
    his imprisonment.

[^8]: Chief Raoni Metuktire, a leader of the Kayapó people, has achieved
    global acclaim as the ambassador for the protection of the Amazon
    rainforest and the rights of Indigenous peoples. Recognized for his
    efforts, he was nominated for the 2020 Nobel Peace Prize. His life
    story was captured in the film *Raoni: The Fight for the Amazon*
    (dir. Jean-Pierre Dutilleux and Luiz Carlos Saldanha, 1978).

[^9]: Israel W. Charny (ed.) *Encyclopedia of genocide*, Volume II,
    Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO, 1999, p. 433.

[^10]: Sonia Guajajara, 'It's Time to Indigenize Politics and Reforest
    Minds', *Sumaúma*, 27 September 2022,
    https://sumauma.com/en/aldear-a-politica-e-reflorestar-mentes/

[^11]: Lilia Schwarcz, Márcio Tavares, Rogério Carvalho and Paulo Vieira
    (curators), 'Brasil Futuro: as Formas da Democracia', National
    Museum of the Republic, Brasília, 1 January to 26 February 2023.

[^12]: *Arte Indígena Contemporânea* (Contemporary Indigenous Art),
    largely established and consolidated in Brazil by the Indigenous
    artist Jaider Esbell (1979--2021), is characterized by the
    protagonism of Indigenous artists. This artistic movement aims to
    rectify historical injustices from within the art realm itself,
    remaining deeply rooted in Indigenous cosmologies while engaging
    with the language and institutions of the dominant art
    establishment. By incorporating the term Indigenous, it challenges
    the western-centric view of Contemporary Art and highlights the
    importance of recognizing Indigenous art as contemporary, indicating
    that it is continually evolving and dynamically responding to
    current issues. See Jaider Esbell, 'Arte indígena contemporânea e o
    grande mundo', *Select*, 7.39 (2018): 98-103,
    https://www.select.art.br/arte-indigena-contemporanea-e-o-grande-mundo/.

[^13]: Alessandra Simões Paiva, *A virada decolonial na arte
    brasileira*, Bauru, SP: Editora Mireveja Ltda, 2022.

[^14]: \@daiaratukano, 'A queda do céu e a mãe de todas as lutas',
    Instagram post, 29 December 2022, *author's translation*,
    https://www.instagram.com/reel/CmwWwO5hTW9/?utm_source=ig_web_copy_link.

[^15]: *Añu* is a term from the Yepá Mahsã people, also known as Tukano,
    from the Upper Rio Negro in the Brazilian Amazon. In their language,
    *Añu* represents an expression of gratitude and appreciation.

[^16]: Davi Kopenawa and Bruce Albert *The Falling Sky: Words of a
    Yanomami Shaman*, trans. Nicholas Elliott and Alison Dundy. London:
    The Belknap Press of Harvard University press, 2013.

[^17]: Jotabê Medeiros, 'As Mirações de Daiara Tukano', *Amazônia Real*,
    3 February 2023,
    https://amazoniareal.com.br/especiais/daiara-tukano/.

[^18]: *The Falling Sky* is the result of a collaboration between
    Kopenawa and Albert developed through their close friendship since
    the 1970s. This influential book has significantly contributed to
    the comprehension of Indigenous cosmologies, serving as both a plea
    to respect native rights and a call for the preservation of the
    Amazon rainforest.

[^19]: According to Kopenawa, there are two instances of the sky falling
    in Yanomami cosmology: one that gives rise to the world as we know
    it, and a second one that would bring its impending end. The current
    earth is thus a sky fallen in the beginning of time. Previously, the
    *yarori*, who were the ancestral beings with animal names, inhabited
    the world. However, the forest became fragile, leading to the
    descent of the sky upon the *yarori*. Consequently, some of the
    inhabitants of this ancient forest assumed the form of game animals,
    while others transformed into *aõpatari*, which are carnivorous
    underworld spirits characterized by their sharp teeth. The sky fall
    in Yanomami cosmology thus serves a dual purpose: it functions as
    the myth of creation and the myth of the apocalypse.

[^20]: The Yanomami people have been engaged in a long-standing struggle
    against illegal mining in their territories. The incursion of
    illegal miners has brought about profound and detrimental effects on
    Yanomami communities. These communities are subjected to various
    forms of harm, including threats, intimidation, murder, and violent
    attacks perpetrated by armed groups associated with illegal mining
    operations. Moreover, illegal mining operations inflict substantial
    environmental damage, including deforestation, the pollution of
    rivers and water sources with toxic substances, and the disruption
    of ecosystems. The use of mercury in gold mining further compounds
    the issue, contaminating water and food sources and causing severe
    health problems for the Yanomami. Mercury poisoning results in
    detrimental effects on their physical health, including neurological
    and developmental issues, as well as an increased prevalence of
    diseases and illnesses. In response, the Yanomami people have been
    actively engaged in advocacy efforts alongside Indigenous
    organizations and allies to safeguard their territories, combat
    illegal mining activities, and raise global awareness about their
    struggle and the urgent need to protect their rights and preserve
    the Amazon rainforest. See Hutukara Associação Yanomami,
    http://hutukara.org/.

[^21]: Only eleven Tupinambá feather cloaks from the 16th and 17th
    centuries exist today, all are held outside Brazil in the
    collections of European museums. Claims for repatriation have
    resulted in a recent donation from the National Museum of Denmark to
    the National Museum of Brazil. See 'The National Museum of Denmark
    to Donate Rare Feather Cape to Brazil', *Via Ritzau*, 27 June 2023,
    https://via.ritzau.dk/pressemeddelelse/the-national-museum-of-denmark-to-donate-rare-feather-cape-to-brazil?publisherId=13560791&releaseId=13700505

[^22]: \@daiaratukano 'Brasil Futuro: As formas da Democracia -- Parte
    2', Instagram post, 3 January 2023, *author's translation*,
    https://www.instagram.com/tv/Cm9r8h_he09/?igshid=NTc4MTIwNjQ2YQ==.

[^23]: In the Tukano language, *hori* represents the vision that gives
    rise to sacred drawings found in ceremonial and everyday objects. It
    encompasses the vibrant representation of the Tukano people's
    stories and perspectives of the universe, the forest, and all beings
    that inhabit it. *Hori* captures the essence of art as a miracle,
    extending beyond mere visual perception to encompass the spiritual
    vision.

[^24]: PT - Partido dos Trabalhadores, 'Ao vivo 01/01 \| A posse do
    presidente Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva - Festival do Futuro', YouTube,
    1 January 2023, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2FjXGLTKg0k.

[^25]: The song 'Ancestralizou (Interlúdio)' by Kaê Guajajara is
    featured on the album *Kwarahy Tazyr*, which was released in 2021
    under the Indigenous Artistic Label AZURUHU (*author\'s
    translation*).

[^26]: https://www.worldpressphoto.org/collection/photo-contest/2009/luiz-vasconcelos/1

[^27]: The green and yellow colors are symbolic of Brazil's national
    flag. During Bolsonaro's presidential campaign in 2018, his
    supporters began using these colors prominently to demonstrate their
    allegiance to him. The choice of green and yellow by Bolsonaro's
    supporters represents their nationalist sentiments and endorsement
    of a conservative agenda, being displayed in rallies, events, and on
    social media platforms as a visual representation of their political
    affiliation.

[^28]: \@celia.xakriaba, 'E se fosse nós, povos indígenas e outros
    movimentos sociais? Vejam como sempre fomos tratados.' 9 January
    2023, *author's translation*,
    https://www.instagram.com/p/CnLAxMZPU1v/?igshid=NTc4MTIwNjQ2YQ%3D%3D.

[^29]: APIB, the Articulation of Indigenous Peoples of Brazil, is a
    grassroots initiative that serves as a national reference for the
    Indigenous movement in the country. Formed in 2005, it aims to
    enhance the unity among Indigenous regional organizations, promote
    collaboration between diverse Indigenous regions and organizations,
    and mobilize against threats and violations of Indigenous rights.
    APIB, https://apiboficial.org/.

[^30]: APIB - Articulação dos Povos Indígenas do Brasil, 'Há mais de 500
    anos os povos indígenas resistem', Facebook post, 9 January 2023,
    https://www.facebook.com/apiboficial/posts/3348975205372625/.

[^31]: See Eduardo Galeano, *Open Veins of Latin America: Five Centuries
    of the Pillage of a Continent*, trans. Cedric Belfrage, London:
    Monthly Review Press, 1973.

[^32]: *Maracá* is a musical instrument used in various Indigenous
    cultures. Typically made from a hollow gourd or a wooden cylinder
    with seeds or small objects inside, the *maracá* is shaken to
    produce rhythmic sounds. It holds cultural and spiritual
    significance for many Indigenous communities, often used in
    ceremonies, rituals, and traditional music.

[^33]: Anielle Franco is the sister of Marielle Franco, a Brazilian
    human rights activist, feminist, and city councilor in Rio de
    Janeiro assassinated on March 14, 2018. Known for her vocal
    opposition to police violence and advocacy for marginalized
    communities, her murder shook the nation, sparking widespread
    outrage and demands for justice. Marielle Franco was a leading
    figure in Brazil's black rights movement and a staunch critic of
    militia groups. These militias are paramilitary organizations
    consisting of retired and off-duty police officers, with roots in
    the death squads of the Brazilian military dictatorship. Shortly
    before her assassination, she was appointed to lead a commission
    responsible for monitoring potential abuses of force during the
    military intervention in Rio de Janeiro's slums. Initial
    investigations revealed that the bullets used in her murder were
    purchased by the federal police. Following her death, her family
    established the Marielle Franco Institute, dedicated to seeking
    justice and continuing her work. Marielle Franco became a symbol of
    resistance and her murder coincided with a surge of intolerance in
    the country, notably during the presidential election that brought
    Jair Bolsonaro to power. Her assassination sparked global protests,
    with hashtags such as #MariellePresente (Marielle is here),
    #MarielleMultiplica (Marielle multiplies), and
    #QuemMandouMatarMarielle (Who ordered Marielle's murder?). In this
    context, the appointment of Anielle Franco as the Minister of Racial
    Equality holds significant symbolic meaning. It not only pays
    tribute to Marielle Franco's legacy but also serves as a powerful
    condemnation of the violence and oppression faced by activists and
    marginalized communities.

[^34]: APIBOFICIAL, 'Cerimônia de posse da Ministra Sônia Guajajara',
    YouTube video, 11 January 2023,
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SawBmzH8Fas.

[^35]: Candomblé is an Afro-Brazilian religion that emerged from the
    blending of traditional West African religions brought to Brazil
    during the Atlantic slave trade of the 16th to 19th centuries. The
    Candomblé group Afoxé Ogum Pá was created in 2014 by Mãe Dora Ti
    Oyá, a priestess of the Ilé Asé TOjú Labá *terreiro* (sacred house
    where the Candomblé religion is practiced). The group combines
    elements of music, dance, and religious rituals to celebrate and
    honor the *orisha* (deity) Ogum. The group's name 'Ogum Pá' refers
    to the Ogum's strong and protective nature. 'Afoxé' is a term used
    to describe Afro-Brazilian musical and dance groups that often
    participate in carnival celebrations and other cultural events
    performing traditional rhythms, often accompanied by percussion
    instruments.

[^36]: Minister Sonia Guajajara inauguration speech, *UOL*, 11 January
    2023,
    https://noticias.uol.com.br/politica/ultimas-noticias/2023/01/11/leia-a-integra-do-discurso-da-ministra-sonia-guajajara.htm?cmpid=copiaecola.

[^37]: On September 4, 1987, Ailton Krenak, the spokesperson of the
    Indigenous Movement in Brazil, delivered a historic speech during
    the National Constituent Assembly, while covering himself in ritual
    face painting using *genipapo* dye. Krenak's influential speech
    played a pivotal role in securing the approval of Articles 231 and
    232 of the 1988 Federal Constitution, formally recognizing
    Indigenous rights for the first time in Brazil. See Ailton Krenak,
    'Discurso de Ailton Krenak, Em 04/09/1987, Na Assembleia
    Constituinte, Brasília, Brasil', *GIS - Gesto, Imagem E Som -
    Revista De Antropologia* 4.1 (2019): 421-22.
    https://doi.org/10.11606/issn.2525-3123.gis.2019.162846.

[^38]: *Constituição da República Federativa do Brasil*. Brasília:
    Senado Federal, Coordenação de Edições Técnica, 1988,
    https://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/constituicao/constituicao.htm.

[^39]: On January 22, 2023, one day after visiting an overcrowded clinic
    for Yanomami patients in Boa Vista, the capital of Roraima, Lula
    expressed his observations on Twitter, stating, 'More than a
    humanitarian crisis, what I saw in Roraima was a genocide. It is a
    premeditated crime against the Yanomami, committed by a government
    that is indifferent to the suffering of the Brazilian people'.
    \@LulaOficial, 'Mais que uma crise humanitária, o que vi em Roraima
    foi um genocídio', Twitter post, 22 January 2023, 12:26 pm,
    *author's translation*,
    https://twitter.com/LulaOficial/status/1617121512506511368?s=20&t=3gY6cpiy14UYBfsxZIkFwA

[^40]: 'Ministério da Saúde declara emergência em saúde pública em
    território Yanomami', *Ministério da Saúde*, 21 January 2023,
    https://www.gov.br/saude/pt-br/assuntos/noticias/2023/janeiro/ministerio-da-saude-declara-emergencia-em-saude-publica-em-territorio-yanomami

[^41]: The COVID-19 pandemic has had a devastating impact on Brazil,
    resulting in 703,719 deaths, as reported by the World Health
    Organization, https://covid19.who.int/region/amro/country/br

[^42]: The TYI, located in the states of Amazonas and Roraima bounded by
    the frontier with Venezuela, encompasses a vast area in the Amazon
    rainforest, with an area of 9,664,975 hectares (23,882,670 acres).
    The combined population of Yanomami people in Brazil and Venezuela
    is estimated to be around 26,000 individuals. In Brazil alone, there
    are approximately 17,000 Yanomami residing in 300 communities. See
    http://hutukara.org/index.php/hay/historia-dos-yanomami.

[^43]: Hutukara Yanomami Association (Org.), *Yanomami Under Attack:
    illegal wildcat mining on Yanomami Indigenous Land and proposals to
    combat it*, Boa Vista: Hutukara Associação Yanomami, 2022,
    https://acervo.socioambiental.org/sites/default/files/documents/yal00067_en.pdf.

[^44]: Sônia Guajajara, 'It's time to \'indigenize politics and reforest
    minds\'', *Sumaúma*, 27 September 2022,
    https://sumauma.com/en/aldear-a-politica-e-reflorestar-mentes/.

[^45]: Marcos Mondardo and Zane do Nascimento, 'Povos indígenas,
    comunidades quilombolas e migrações', *Revista Tocantinense de
    Geografia*, 12.26 (2023): 01--21, p. 5, DOI:
    10.20873/rtg.v12i26.15747.

[^46]: Sonia Guajajara speech, *UOL*, 11 January 2023.

[^47]: The Camp Terra Livre (ATL) is the largest Indigenous mobilization
    in Brazil. The first ATL took place in 2004 when Indigenous
    communities from the southern region of Brazil occupied the Ministry
    of Justice at the Esplanade of Ministries in Brasília. This initial
    mobilization gained support from Indigenous leaders and
    organizations across the country, thereby strengthening the call for
    a New Indigenous Policy agreed upon during the electoral period that
    same year. As a result, the formalization of the Articulation of
    Indigenous Peoples of Brazil (APIB) occurred in November 2005, as a
    direct outcome of the decisions made during the first ATL. See APIB,
    https://apiboficial.org/.

[^48]: 'Sem demarcação não há democracia!', *APIB*, 28 April 2023,
    https://apiboficial.org/2023/04/28/sem-demarcacao-nao-ha-democracia/.

[^49]: See 'Entenda as leis que promovem o desmonte dos Ministérios dos
    Povos Indígenas e do Meio Ambiente', *Presidência da República*, 25
    May 2023,
    https://www.gov.br/povosindigenas/pt-br/assuntos/noticias/2023/05/entenda-as-leis-que-promovem-o-desmonte-dos-ministerios-dos-povos-indigenas-e-do-meio-ambiente.

[^50]: Ailton Krenak, *Futuro Ancestral*, São Paulo: Companhia das
    Letras, 2022.
