---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Biographies

## Editors:

**Lou Caffagni** is a researcher in education and communication
affiliated with the Laboratory of Community Communication (LECC) of the
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro and a member of the Mário Schenberg
Institute. He holds a PhD in Education and Philosophy from the
University of São Paulo. He writes about literature, school curriculum,
communication, and social movements, and published a book about the
juvenile justice system, as well as a series of papers about education
and philosophy.

**Isabel Löfgren** is a Swedish-Brazilian artist, researcher, educator,
and writer based in Stockholm, Sweden, and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and
is a Senior Lecturer in Media and Communication Studies at Södertörn
University, Sweden. She has a B.A. in Studio Art from Smith College
(USA), an MFA from the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, and a PhD
in Philosophy, Art, and Critical Thought from the European Graduate
School (Switzerland). Her research interests include visual politics,
contemporary art, media philosophy, and media activism, and often works
in collaboration with art collectives, civil society organizations, and
art institutions. She also has an artistic practice with contemporary
art exhibitions and public art installations using a variety of mediums
connected to her research interests. She has written extensively about
digital popular culture, media activism, and contemporary art in Brazil
during the Bolsonaro government in the *Critical Meme Reader 2: Memetic
Tacticality* (2022), *Paletten* (2019), *Ord & Bild* (2021) and
*Eurozine* (2022), and presented at the conference *Urgent Publishing* -
Institute of Network Cultures (2019), among others. In 2020, she
published *Satellite Lifelines: Art, Media, Migration and the Crisis of
Hospitality in Divided Cities* with the INC. Website:
www.isabellofgren.se.

**Paola Madrid Sartoretto** is an Associate Professor in Media and
Communication at the School of Education and Communication, Jönköping
University, Sweden where she coordinates the international MSSc in
Sustainable Communication. Her research interests are in the
intersection between communication, political participation, and social
change, with a focus on communication among marginalized groups.
Sartoretto has also conducted research in collaboration with social
movements in Brazil and co-edited with Sandra Jeppesen the anthology
*Media Activist Research Ethics* (2020) published by Palgrave in the
IAMCR series *Global Transformations in Media and Communication
Research*.

**Gizele de Oliveira Martins** is a journalist and a PhD candidate in
Communication at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ). She
graduated in journalism from PUC-Rio and holds a master\'s degree in
Education, Culture, and Communication in Urban Peripheries from the
State University of Rio de Janeiro (UERJ). In 2019, she released the
book *Militarization and Censorship - the Struggle for Freedom of
Expression* in the Maré Favela, in Rio de Janeiro. She has lectured
internationally and has received numerous awards for her journalism
focused on human rights and anti-racism issues. She also coaches
community communication courses, such as \'Living Histories: The History
of Resistance in Rio de Janeiro\'s Favelas', and is a consultant and
facilitator for the National Network for the Protection of Journalists
and Communicators in Brazil. Today, she works with community
organizations such as the *Coalizão de Mídias Periféricas*; *Faveladas,
Quilombolas e Indígenas*; *Coletivo Maré 0800*; and *Frente de
Mobilização da Maré*.

## Contributors: 

**Leandro Barboza** is a visual artist and restorer who lives and works
in Rio de Janeiro. He earned a Bachelor\'s degree in Painting from the
School of Fine Arts at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ)
in 2004. He is also a member of the Faixa Protesta collective, along
with Gustavo Speridião. In addition to numerous restoration projects in
historical locations in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016, he inaugurated the
ATELIER SANITÁRIO (Pipa Prize, 2022), along with artists Gustavo
Speridião and Daniel Murgel. It is at this moment, in the vibrant and
multicultural space of Gâmboa, that the poetic unfolding of his entire
experience in construction work begins. At ATELIER SANITÁRIO, in
addition to the permanent exhibition of his own work between 2016 and
2023, he organizes artistic residencies, dozens of group exhibitions
(such as the Salão Vermelho de Artes Degeneradas), music events,
independent publication fairs, workshops, meetings, and even a doctoral
defense. Since 2018, he has been working with Gustavo Speridião on the
FAIXA PROTESTA project, which involves bringing banners with paintings
and rebellious poetry to protests. He has participated in various group
exhibitions, including \"O que há de música em você\" at Athena Galeria
de Arte in October 2023, \"Sol a Sol\" at Galeria Arte Fasam in August
2020, \"A Casa Carioca\" at MAR-Rio in 2020, \"Atelier Sanitário +
Bastardo\" at Centro Cultural Phábrika in 2018, \"Entre #4\" at Portas
Vilaseca Galeria in 2017, and \"Tudo fora de ordem\" at Espaço Saracura
in 2017. You can find him on Instagram: \@leandro_barboza.

**Viviane Borelli** is an associate professor in the Graduate Program in
Communication and the undergraduate programs of Social Communication -
Journalism, Editorial Production, Public Relations, and Advertising at
the Federal University of Santa Maria (UFSM), located in Santa Maria,
RS, Brazil. She holds a PhD in Communication Sciences from Unisinos, São
Leopoldo, RS. She coordinates the Media Communication and Communication
Strategies Research Group (Cimid) and the research project 'Societies in
Mediatization: Circulation, Discourses and Platforms'. Her research
interests lie in the areas of mediatization, communication theories,
semiotics, discourse, circulation, humor, memes, politics, and religion.

**Apoena Canuto Cosenza** is an economic historian who graduated from
the Program of Economic History at the Department of History of the
University of São Paulo, where he earned his master\'s and doctoral
degrees. In his doctoral research, he studied Brazil\'s foreign trade
during the first two governments of the PT (Workers Party) from 2003 to
2011. He is a member of the Laboratory of Political Economy and Economic
History at USP and a founding member of the Mário Schenberg Institute.
He also researches quantitative methods applied to history, economic
history, international relations, and the history of war. He is the
author of the book Um partido, duas Táticas: Uma história organizativa e
política do Partido Comunista Brasileiro, de 1922 a 1935 (NEA, 2020).

**Bartira S. Fortes** is a Brazilian performance artist, anthropologist,
and PhD candidate in Environmental studies at the Department of
Environment, Development, and Sustainability Studies, Södertörn
University, Sweden. She investigates Indigenous ethnomedia in Latin
America, focusing on how Indigenous peoples have used media technologies
as a tool for mobilization. Her academic background can be found in the
conjuncture of Humanities and Social Sciences, intersecting
environmental science, global development studies, social anthropology,
performing arts, and media. Her research interests include themes of
democracy, climate change, Indigenous media, and art, Indigenous
peoples' participation in global politics, socioenvironmental justice,
digital activism, artivism, and decolonization. In her master's thesis
titled 'Democracy, a Tragic Carnivalesque Hero: The Narratives of a
Transnational Social Movement Against the Coup in Brazil' (2020), Fortes
investigated the emergence of forms of resistance among Brazilians in
the diaspora against the authoritarian turn in Brazil since 2016 and
developed the concept of democracy as a tragic carnivalesque hero.
Website: www.bartirafortes.com.

**Camila Hartmann** is a PhD student in the Department of Communication
Sciences at the Federal University of Santa Maria (UFSM), in the
research line of *Media and Contemporary Identities*. She was a visiting
PhD Student in the Department of Media and Communication Studies at
Södertörn University, Sweden, through the CAPES-STINT research exchange.
She has a B.S. in Social Communication and Journalism (2017) and a
Master in Communications (2019) from UFSM. She has been a member of the
*Communication, Identities and Borders* Research Group (UFSM/CNPq) since
2014, and *MagNet*, an international network of researchers in Magazine
Studies, since its foundation, in 2023. She published the chapter
\'Converting Social Exclusion into News: The Visibility of the Periphery
on Magazine Covers\' (2018) in an anthology by the National Association
of Graduate Programs in Communication (COMPÓS), Brazil. Her research
interests in scientific, technological, and artistic-cultural production
include periphery, mediatization, platforms, journalism, semiotics,
discourse, and journalistic front pages.

**Clementino Jesus Junior** is a filmmaker based in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil. He has a PhD in Education from the Federal University of the
State of Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO), a Master in Education from Rio de
Janeiro State University (UERJ), and a B.A. in Industrial Design /
Visual Programming from the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ).
He is a high school teacher in public schools working with audiovisual
and multimedia education, and a teacher of technical and free courses in
private institutions and NGOs. His PhD thesis 'Canto da lama - Cinema
and Pedagogy *desde el sur* Against Necropolitics' (2022) presents a
Global South perspective on environmental cinema practices as a way to
see how the authorship of those affected by environmental crimes can
present counter-visualities to confront corporations for reparations, by
using self-narratives and audiovisual tools in dialogical educational
practices. He is also a researcher of *Grupo de Estudios en Educación
Ambiental Desde el Sur* (GEASur) since 2017. In 2008, he founded
*Cineclube Atlântico Negro (CAN),* an organization that proposes the use
of Black-authored cinema for anti-racist education and in favor of human
rights. As a filmmaker, he has made 29 films of various genres, mostly
documentaries.

**Tatiana Letier Pinto** is a Brazilian architect, artist, and
independent researcher based in Stockholm. Her main research interests
revolve around social inequalities in the built environment and the
political aspect of space. She holds a master's degree in Sustainable
Architecture from Bologna University and a master's from the Bartlett
Development Planning Unit at the University College of London. She
collaborates with the Decolonizing Architecture Advanced Studies (DAAS)
in the post-master course held at the Royal Institute of Art (KKH) in
Stockholm, Sweden.

**Ada C. Machado Silveira** is a Professor at the Federal University of
Santa Maria (UFSM), and a Researcher at the National Council for
Scientific and Technological Development - CNPq, Brazil. She served as a
Senior Visiting Researcher at Södertörn University, Sweden (2022-2023)
in the CAPES-STINT research exchange. She works as a researcher in the
graduate programs in Communication at the Federal University of Santa
Maria (UFSM) and the Federal University of Pampa, Brazil. She has served
as a visiting professor at universities in Argentina (Universidad
Nacional de La Plata, Universidad Nacional de San Luis, and Universidad
Nacional de Quilmes), Paraguay (Universidad Nacional del Este, and
Universidad Nacional de Asunción) and Mexico (Benemérita Universidad de
Puebla and Universidad Nacional de Tlaxcala). Leader of the
*Communication, Identities and Borders* Research Group - CIFront
(UFSM/CNPq) since 2001. She is dedicated to in-depth analysis of media
activity and the reconstruction of newsworthiness in the face of clashes
between a littoral and elitist perception of journalism, which
stigmatizes peripheral national spaces, such as the favelas, the wide
Brazilian borders, and the Amazon. She is the author of *Conexões
(trans) fronteiriças* (Silveira and Guimarães, 2016) and the chapter
*The Name of the Other* (Silveira, Guimarães, and Schwartz, 2017). Her
main research interests concern mediatization, journalism and
securitization, media identities, and Communication for Development.

**Alecsandra Matias de Oliveira** is a curator and art historian based
in São Paulo, Brazil. She has a PhD in Visual Arts from the University
of São Paulo (ECA-USP), and a post-doctoral degree in Visual Arts at
UNESP. She is a professor at CELACC and a researcher at the *Mario
Schenberg Center for Arts Documentation and Research*, both at ECA-USP,
São Paulo, Brazil. She is a member of the *International Association of
Art Critics* (AICA) and contributes articles to the *Jornal da USP*
(2022). She is also a contributor to *Revista Dasartes* and works as an
independent curator. She is the author of the books *Schenberg: Crítica
e Criação* (EDUSP, 2011) and *Memória da Resistência* (MCSP, 2022).

**Maria Eduarda Mathias** has an undergraduate degree in Publicity and
Advertising and is currently studying for a Master\'s degree in
Communication, both at the Federal University of Santa Maria (UFSM),
Brazil, in the research line of media and communication strategies. Her
research interests include social communication and politics, social
networks and platformization, and is part of the research group
*Mediatic Circulation* at UFSM. In her dissertation titled 'The
Spiritual Battle in Voting: the Circulation of Meaning in the
*#bolsonarosatanista* Event during the 2022 Presidential Elections',
still being developed, she develops the articulation between the
presence of Evangelical Christians in Brazilian politics and the impact
of discursive strategies on Twitter during the 2022 presidential
elections in Brazil.

**Laercio Redondo** is a Brazilian-born artist and he received his MFA
from Konstfack, University College of Arts, Crafts, and Design, in
Stockholm. He is the recipient of various grants, among them the
Akademie Schloss Solitude fellowship in Stuttgart, the IASPIS residency
program in Stockholm, and Clark Art Institute in Williamstown, USA. In
his artistic research, Redondo engages extensively with collective
memory and its erasure in society. He has exhibited widely in galleries
and museums of modern and contemporary art. His solo exhibitions include
as *maravilhas\** at Museu de Arte Contemporânea de São Paulo, *The
simplest thing is the hardest to do* at the Mies van der Rohe Pavilion
in Barcelona, *Recast* at the Pinacoteca do Estado de São Paulo, *Past
Projects for the Future*, Dallas Contemporary, as well as *What ends
every day* at the Museu de Arte Moderna in Rio de Janeiro. He has also
participated in group exhibitions at the Museu de Arte do Rio; Bienal de
Cuenca, Ecuador; Zachęta - National Gallery of Art, Warsaw; Bienal do
Mercosul, Porto Alegre; the Stedelijk Museum Bureau Amsterdam and SESC
Pompeia in São Paulo. His work is featured in the collections of such
international organizations as Moderna Museet in Stockholm, Pinacoteca
do Estado de São Paulo, Museu de Arte Moderna do Rio de Janeiro, and
Museu de Arte Contemporânea da Universidade de São Paulo. Website:
www.laercioredondo.com.

**Aline Roes Dalmolin** is an Adjunct Professor at the Department of
Communication Sciences at the Federal University of Santa Maria (UFSM)
in Brazil, linked to the Graduate Program in Communication Sciences. She
has a PhD and Master in Communication Sciences from the University of
Vale do Rio dos Sinos (Unisinos), Brazil, and an undergraduate degree in
Journalism from the Federal University of Santa Maria (UFSM), Brazil.
She is the leader of the CNPq research group 'Media Circulation and
Communication Strategies' (Cimid), with lines of research in the
following themes: social networks, media and religion, journalism, media
discourse, communication, and biopolitics.

**Ana Paula da Rosa** is a Professor, researcher, and Coordinator of the
post-graduate program in Communication Science at Universidade do Vale
do Rio dos Sinos (UNISINOS), Brazil. She has an undergraduate degree in
Journalism from Universidade de Passo Fundo (2001), a Master\'s degree
in Communications and Language from Universidade Tuiuti do Paraná
(2007), and a PhD in Communication Science in *Mediatization and Social
Processes* research group, from Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos
(UNISINOS), and a post-doctoral degree in Communications from
Universidade Federal Fluminense (UFF) (2018), all in Brazil. She is also
the research leader for the *Circulation, Image, and Mediatization*
(LACIM) network in Brazil. In 2022, she was a Visiting Professor at
Södertörn University, Sweden, through CAPES/STINT Sweden-Brazil research
collaboration. At UNISINOS, she works in the research line of
Mediatization and Social Processes, in addition to the courses in
Advertising, Journalism, Public Relations, and Digital Communication.
Her research interests include mediatization, image circulation,
visibility crisis, imaginaries, photojournalism, and coverage of
mediatized conflicts.

**Eduardo Ruedell** is a researcher based in Santa Maria, Brazil, and is
interested in how media affect social processes, and how social
processes impact media. He is currently a PhD student in Media and
Communications and a Research Fellow at the Universidade Federal de
Santa Maria (UFSM), Brazil. Ruedell received a Bachelor's Degree in
Social Communication with minors in Editorial Production (2020) and a
Master's Degree in Media Communication (2023) both at UFSM, with a
dissertation about the communication structure of French anti-vaccine
movement *Collectif Lyon Pour La Liberté*. E-mail:
eduardo.ruedell@acad.ufsm.br.

**Gabriela Schneider** is a PhD student in Communications at the Federal
University of Santa Maria (UFSM) Brazil, and a Lecturer in Law and
Municipal Public Security courses at the Faculty of Law of Santa Maria -
FADISMA. She is a lawyer in the Human Rights Commission of the Brazilian
Lawyers' Association (OAB), in Santa Maria. She is also an associate
researcher at the study group on *State Capacity, Security and Defense*
(GECAP), and a member of the *Communication, Identities and Borders*
Research Group CIFront, both at UFSM. Her doctoral thesis is titled
\'Media and Public Security in Brazil: the *Jornal Nacional* and the
Securitization of Federal Intervention in Rio de Janeiro in 2018\'. Her
studies related to the Brazilian state, especially regarding the
acquisition of rights and penal systems are present in the article \'The
Historical Relation between the Process of Acquisition of Rights and the
Accusation System in Brazil\' (Schneider and Callegari, 2018). Her
research interests include media, journalistic discourses, public
security, violence, criminal law, and human rights.

**Gustavo Speridião** is a visual artist who lives and works in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. He works in a wide range of media including
photography, film, collages, and drawings. Together with Leandro
Barboza, he is part of the collective *Faixa Protesta*. Speridião took
part in various collective exhibitions, such as *Imagine Brazil* curated
by Gunnar B. Kvaran, Thierry Raspail, and Hans Ulrich Obrist (Oslo,
Lyon, Canada, Qatar, and São Paulo. 2013-2015). *South-South: Let Me
Begin Again* (2017) curated by Renato Silva e Lara Kossef, Goodman
Gallery, Capetown, South Africa. Solo shows include *Chronicle du
Trouble* curated by Thierry Raspail (Les Filles du Calvaire gallery,
Paris, 2020), *Géometrie. Montage. Equilibrage*, *Photos and Videos* (
Maison Européenne de La Photographie, Paris, 2013) and the simultaneous
exhibitions *On Painting* and *Time Color* curated by Miguel Chaia (Sé
Gallery, São Paulo, 2021). Among the prizes received, the highlights are
Projéteis Artes Visuais, by Funarte, in 2007 and Marcantônio Villaça /
FUNARTE (Acquisition for the collection of the Museum of Contemporary
Art in Niterói), in 2010. His works are in important Brazilian public
collections such as the National Museum of Fine Arts, Rio de Janeiro,
the Gilberto Chateaubriand Collection (Museum of Modern Art, Rio de
Janeiro), the Museum of Contemporary Art in Niterói, and the Art Museum
of Rio de Janeiro (MAR). Website: www.speridiao.com.

**Oscar Svanelid** is a Senior Lecturer and Postdoctoral Researcher in
Art History at the Institution of Culture and Education at Södertörn
University, Sweden. He is currently working on a post-doctoral project
(financed by the Swedish Research Council) on art and democracy in
Sweden and Norway, focusing on public artworks installed in closed
governmental spaces such as prisons, military facilities, and
governmental offices. His PhD dissertation *Shaping Lives* (2021)
analyzed the relationship between art and labor in Brazilian
constructive art, and more recently, he has investigated the notion of
whiteness in the Indigenous Contemporary Art movement in Brazil. E-mail:
oscar.svanelid@sh.se.
